We feel great satisfaction in publishing the following verses by the distinguished author of the 'Pleasures of Hope,' Thomas Campbell, one of the original members of the New Zealand Association, who has always taken the deepest interest in the undertaking.

SONG OF THE EMIGRANTS TO NEW ZEALAND.

Steer, helmsman, till you steer our way
By stars beyond the line—
We go to found a realm—one day—
Like England's self to shine.

Chorus:
Cheer up! cheer up! our course we'll keep
With dauntless heart and hand,
And when we've ploughed the stormy deep
We'll plough a smiling land.

A land whose beauties importune
The Briton to its bowers,
To sow hut plenty's seeds and prune
Luxuriant fruits and flowers.

Chorus:
Cheer up! cheer up!

A sunnny land with varying sweets
Of healthy plains and hills,
With giant woods to build our fleets,
And floods to drive our mills.

Chorus:
Cheer up!, cheer up!

There tracts uncheered by human words,
Seclusions wildest holds,
Shall hear the lowing of our herds,
The tinkling of our folds.

Chorus:
Cheer up!, cheer up!

Like rubies set in gold shall blush
Our vineyards, girt with corn,
And wine, and oil, and gladness gush
From Amalthœa's horn.

Chorus:
Cheer up!, cheer up!

Britannia's pride is in our hearts,
Her blood is in our veins,
We'll girdle earth with British arts,
Like Ariel's magic chains.

Chorus:
Cheer up! cheer up! our course we'll keep
With dauntless heart and hand,
And when we've ploughed the stormy deep
We'll plough a smiling land.

T. Campbell.

London, 16th August 1839.

New Zealand Gazette and Wellington Spectator > 21 August 1839 > Page 6
https://paperspast.natlib.govt.nz/newspapers/new-zealand-gazette-and-wellington-spectator/1839/08/21/6