# PRAYERS AT OPENING.

**The Hon. Major KENNY** moved, That it is fit and proper that the first act of the Legislative Council of New Zealand shall be to open its proceedings with prayer, and a supplication for the Divine blessing on the future labours of the Council.

**The Hon. Major RICHMOND** seconded the motion.

**The Hon. Mr. DILLON BELL** would not oppose the object of the motion so far as to propose any amendment, for he was deeply convinced of the importance of seeking the Divine blessing upon all the affairs of life. But he deemed it objectionable, as tending to interfere with that perfect religious equality which the Constitution recognized.

**The Hon. Major KENNY** had anticipated that the proposal would be unanimously agreed to; but if, though it was not objected to, it was thought objectionable, he would prefer withdrawing it.

**The Hon. the SPEAKER** observed that the motion, having been moved and seconded, could not now be withdrawn without the consent of the Council.

**The Hon. Major RICHMOND** said that, as the seconder of the motion, he would not consent to its withdrawal.

Motion agreed to.

**The Hon. Mr. ST. HILL** moved, That a clergyman of the Church of England be requested to read prayers at this Council on the occasion of its first sitting, and to invoke the blessing of Almighty God upon its deliberations.

**The Hon. Major RICHMOND** seconded the motion.

**The Hon. Mr. DILLON BELL** again expressed his apprehension that some invasion of the equality now existing between all sects might be apprehended. It was not, just then, an immediately practical question, for he believed that all the honourable members then around the table were members of the Church of England; but it might not always be so, seeing that there was nothing in the Constitution Act to prevent the placing of men in the Council who altogether denied the doctrines which Christians held sacred. He was not willing to introduce on this question the thin end of the wedge.

**The Hon. Major KENNY** moved, as an amendment, That prayers be read by the Speaker.

**The Hon. Mr. DILLON BELL** seconded the amendment.

Amendment agreed to.