# ADDRESS IN REPLY.

The Hon. Mr. DILLON BELL moved the adoption of the following Reply to the Speech of His Excellency the Officer Administering the Government, which had been brought up
by the Committee on Tuesday :-

"To His Excellency Robert Henry Wynyard, C.B., the Officer Administering the Government of New Zealand, &c., &c.

"Mᴀʏ ɪᴛ ᴘʟᴇᴀsᴇ ʏᴏᴜʀ Exᴄᴇʟʟᴇɴᴄʏ,-

"We, the Legislative Council of New Zealand, desire to convey our thanks to your Excellency for the Address with which you have been pleased to open the first session of the General Assembly.

"We beg to offer to your Excellency our most sincere congratulations that the privilege has devolved upon you of placing the people of New Zealand in the full enjoyment of the constitutional rights conferred upon them by our Gracious Sovereign and her Parliament; and to assure you that your Excellency's desire of friendly co-operation and support will be most cordially responded to by his House.

"We rejoice at being able entirely to concur with your Excellency in the existence of prosperity among all classes in the colony; and to bear our testimony, assembling as we have done from many parts of the country, to the increase of material wealth throughout the Islands to which your Excellency has referred.

"The maintenance especially of peaceful and friendly relations between Her Majesty's subjects of both races, and the increasing intelligence and civilization of the Natives, lead us to the earnest hope that the time is not far distant when the aboriginal population shall take a part in the same constitutional duties and privileges as ourselves.

"We beg to assure your excellency that whatever measures may be brought before us by your Government, or by the other House of Assembly, will not fail to receive our most careful attention; and we unite with your Excellency in the prayer that it may please Almighty God to direct and prosper the counsels of the first Parliament of New Zealand, to the honour of the Queen, and the welfare and happiness of her people in this portion of her dominions."

The Hon. Major RICHMOND seconded motion.

The Hon. Mr. SEYMOUR moved, as an amendment, That the following sentence be added to the Reply now under consideration of the Council, next after the words "to receive our most careful attention: " "We cannot, however, refrain from expressing our regret that no mention of the consideration of the important subject of education was made in your Excellency's Address."

The Hon. Major LLOYD seconded the amendment.

Debate ensued.

The amendment was put, and negatived.

Whereupon the original motion was agreed to.

The Hon. Major RICHMOND withdrew his motion that a humble and loyal Address be presented to Her Majesty, expressing the gratitude of this Council for conferring on her subjects in these Islands their ancient and constitutional rights.

On the motion of the Hon. Major RICHMOND, it was agreed, That on Monday next, at twelve o'clock, the proposer and seconder of the Address to His Excellency the Officer Administering the Government, with any others of the Council who wish, proceed to lay before His Excellency the Address in answer to His Excellency's Speech on the opening of the session.
