# IMPROVED ACCOMMODATION.

Mr. MACKAY rose to move for a Committee to consider the best means of improving the new Council buildings, so as to afford better accommodation to members.

Mr. GIBBON WAKEFIELD seconded the motion, and remarked that the principles of acoustics seemed to have been entirely disregarded in the construction of the chamber allotted to that House. It was most difficult for members to hear each other speak: indeed, on the previous evening he was led to mistake what fell from his honourable friend the member for Wairarapa, not from any weakness of his friend's voice, but because of the difficulty of hearing in that chamber; for the fact was that, as it was constructed, the best seat for hearing would be on one of the cross-beams in the roof, and, however uncomfortable such a seat might be thought to be, it would not be harder than the one from which he had just risen. An honourable member had told him that, after being long accustomed to row at Cambridge, he thought no hardship of a hard seat; but, for himself, he had had no such practice, and such seats were a hardship beyond joking to men of heavy weights. Members who did their duty in that House would have severe mental exercise for long hours, and their bodily comfort should not be disregarded. He trusted the Committee would see to these matters, and at the same time pay attention to secure a better ventilation.

Dr. LEE trusted the Committee would attend also to the comforts of the inner man, and provide a refreshment-room.

Mr. MERRIMAN suggested that, while the outer and inner man were being provided for, the Committee ought to make provision also for the intellectual man. He thought it would be well if they would take into consideration the formation of a joint library with the other House.

Mr. REVANS suggested that the Committee should keep to the duties first mentioned, and that a Library Committee might be formed.

Major GREENWOOD suggested the propriety of providing seats for members of the Upper House when they visited, and also for ladies.

Mr. O'BRIEN begged also that suitable accommodation for the Press should not be neglected.

Motion agreed to.