# NELSON NATIVE TRUST LANDS.

Mr. PICARD moved for a return of all moneys received as rents of the lands comprised in the Native reserves in the Province of Nelson, by the persons managing such lands, from the month of January, 1852, till the present date, and of the expenditure of such moneys. Mr. Picard said that more than one-half of the available lands in the district was, comprised within those lands, and, as the subject would shortly be brought under the consideration of the House, it was desirable that the information which the returns would supply should be before the House as soon as possible.

Mr. WELD seconded the motion.

Mr. SEWELL said that in thus moving for various returns members might find themselves only groping their way in the dark; for this reason: that the House had not any responsible person to represent the Government, as in the House of Commons, who could intimate to the House whether such returns could or would be granted. In the House of Commons it was usual to ask the Government if it would be convenient to furnish returns before they were moved for: here, unfortunately, there was no one present to represent the Government, to whom such question might be put. He could easily imagine that a large amount of work would soon be accumulated on the Executive Government by members from the various provinces calling for returns, and he thought, from the scarcity of clerical means to prepare them, the Government, although ever so willing to grant them, might be driven to refuse many, and perhaps some that would be of the greatest importance to that House. He thought means should be taken to ascertain which returns of those called for would be the most generally or specifically needful, and then for the House to concentrate its requests to the Government on such returns only. His opinion was that a Committee should be appointed, to whom motions for returns should be first referred, the House to be guided by the reports of that Committee as to applications for returns: otherwise the Executive Government might be so overwhelmed with labour that the most useful and needful returns might not be supplied. He concluded by moving, as an amendment, That a Committee be formed for the purpose of ascertaining if returns applied for were likely to be really useful, and, then, if they could be conveniently supplied by the Government, and whether or not the single return should be called for only, or that, as might often be desirable, it should be made to form one of a series or class on the same subject.

Mr. GIBBON WAKEFIELD would second the amendment, for he must confess that there was great truth and force in what had just been said by his honourable friend the member for Christchurch. It was undeniable that mem<!--16-->bers would have many returns to call for, and it was quite evident that the House would support every motion for returns, members being very willing to oblige each other in this respect to the fullest extent, so that the Speaker would soon have on his hands claims for a vast amount of these returns, and it was quite certain that out of them would come some positive refusals. There was no one in the House who could explain on behalf of the Government, and in all probability the House would be brought into unpleasant collision with the Executive; and, to avoid anything of this kind, he thought "the course pointed out by his honourable friend was a wise one.

Mr. REVANS was perfectly astonished at what he had just heard, and felt it most difficult to understand how such a proposition should have the approval of the honourable member who last spoke. Could it be possible that the parent had deserted his own child? Surely this amendment was nothing less than a compromise of a great principle. Here was a Committee of the House proposed as a substitute for a responsible Minister; and this proposal made, too, by the honourable members for Christchurch and the Hutt. Surely this was a forgetfulness of a principle which, above all men, was to be least expected from those honourable members. The appointment of this Committee of theirs would be nothing less than to defeat the object in view. One could not deny that members were in a most anomalous position in this House; and members must all see the great inconvenience which would be felt at every turn unless a Minister of the Government were present to explain and state the views of the Executive. He would advise the mover, rather than submit to have his returns procured through the medium invented by this amendment, to withdraw his motion altogether.

Mr. O'NEILL thought it very improper to attempt to shelve a motion of this kind by referring it to a Committee. Surely every member of the House was entitled to receive from the Government whatever information he required to qualify him to bring subjects before the House which needed their consideration. Nothing ought to be kept back, and he was astonished at any member preventing another in his search for information. Let the request be made to the Executive, and it would be for them to say whether it could be complied with or not.

Dr. MONRO said the amendment would involve the consequence of placing the minority in subjugation to the majority; and that would be a dangerous restriction of the freedom which every member ought to possess. It was, therefore, entirely at variance with principles which would tend to the welfare of the House. If the Government declined to furnish information, the House would know how to vindicate its own position in demanding and obtaining whatever was required. He was surprised to hear an amendment of this character supported by members so well acquainted with the principles which ought to guide that House.

Mr. FORSAITH craved the indulgence of the House. He saw men of practical ability, men familiar with the details of debate, around him. He naturally felt a considerable degree of anxiety in the duties which now devolved upon him. He regretted that it was his duty to speak in terms of censure as to the manner in which the amendment had been brought forward. He could not but object to it as unworthy—

Mr. REVANS must object to the use of the term "unworthy."

Mr. FORSAITH used the term advisedly—as unworthy the topic. He sought to impute no unworthy motive to the member.

Mr. REVANS still objected to the use of the term under any application.

Mr. FORSAITH would withdraw the word. He would substitute the word "unexpected," and say—the unexpected manner in which the subject had been introduced. He appealed to the House whether it would be fair to the minority to introduce the question of responsibility in such a manner. It would be unfair to press such a question at once, until they had time to consider it. He himself was slow of thought, and the ends at which others arrived with intuitive rapidity he could only master step by step. He had no desire to refuse to consider the question of Responsible Government. He courted its introduction, and should support inquiry.

Mr. SEWELL said he had been charged with dragging the question of Responsible Government before the House. His object, on the contrary, was to get over a practical difficulty. He had no doubt that that difficulty had brought the question of Responsible Government before the House; but it was not his object. As the House was without the usual constitutional means of obtaining information, he had proposed an amendment to meet a difficulty. He begged he might not be misunderstood in the object with which he made the amendment. It had been supposed he wished to curtail the privileges of individual members; but it was not so.

The House divided upon the question, "That a Committee be appointed, to whom all motions for returns from time to time be referred; and that such Committee do report from time to time to the House as to what returns should be asked from the Executive Government, and in what form; and that it be an instruction to such Committee to take into consideration and report as to the best means of ascertaining from the Executive Government whether and when such returns may be obtained."

AYES, 8: Gray, Kelham, Macandrew, Porter, Rhodes, Wakefield, E.G., Wakefield E.J.. Teller: Sewell.

NOES, 23: Bartley, Cargill, Carleton, Crompton, Cutten, FitzGerald, Forsaith, Gledhill, Greenwood, Hart, King, Lee, Ludlam, Mackay, Merriman,<!--17--> Monro, O'Brien, O'Neill, Revans, Stuart-Wortley, Taylor, Weld. Teller: Picard.

Majority against, 15.

The amendment was consequently negatived.

Mr. MERRIMAN supported the motion.

Mr. PICARD said in reply he had every reason to believe that the necessary information was in the hands of a gentleman of the Province of Auckland. The constituency he represented considered the returns were of great importance. Expectation and feeling were high in the Province of Wellington respecting these returns. He was aware of the difficulty pressing upon the House, in consequence of the Government having no responsible officer there. The difficulty would meet them at every turn.

The original motion was put and carried.