# DUTIES ON GOODS.

Mr. CROMPTON moved for a return of duties paid on goods, &c., imported into New Plymouth. He had endeavoured to obtain the information in his own province, but had been referred to the Colonial Secretary. Duties were paid in Auckland and Wellington, and the goods were sent to New Plymouth. These did not appear in the returns for New Plymouth. He wished to direct attention to the increased Native traffic in the province.

Mr. REVANS seconded the motion. Upper Canada, he said, furnished a similar instance of the unequal way in which duties were levied. Taranaki had been robbed of her just rights in her Customs, and he hoped she would now receive justice.

Mr. FITZGERALD wished to know if it were meant to ask for returns of all duty-paid goods imported into the province. The question affected Canterbury, and all newly-founded settlements. Some arrangements should be made for a drawback on goods shipped to either province.

Mr. GIBBON WAKEFIELD supported the motion. If this motion had been referred to a Committee, a return for other provinces would, no doubt, have been asked for. If there was a Minister in the House responsible to the Government a Committee might not be wanted. He had wished—and he hoped the honourable member for Waimea (Dr. Monro) would bear it in mind—to avert collision with the Government.

Mr. SEWELL said it appeared to him desirable to find out from what province goods were imported. He suggested the addition to the honourable member.

This was considered impracticable, and the motion was put and carried.

On the request of Mr. REVANS, supported by the Hon. J. STUART-WORTLEY, leave was granted for the postponement of Mr. Revans's motion for the election of a Clerk until Tuesday.