# Address from the Committee of Colonists
Saturday, 18 April 1840

The President and Council of the Colony take this opportunity of calling the attention of the Colonists to two documents published in this day's "Gazette"— one, the agreement or contract of government, signed in London by the majority of the Emigrants; and the other, a ratification of that agreement, subject to certain modifications, by the Sovereign Chiefs of the district.

The first and most important duty of the Council, upon their re-assembling in the Colony, was to take measures for the preservation of order and the maintenance of law. Although they had witnessed with much satisfaction the peaceful and orderly demeanour of nearly the whole of the Colonists, yet there had been some disorders which required an exercise of authority, and some differences which needed an appeal to a court of law. To secure the person and property of each inhabitant of the Colony against violence, and to establish a court of law for the adjustment of conflicting claims, were matters which admitted of no unnecessary delay. Besides these first and most pressing duties, many other points of deep interest to the Colony required early attention. It was needful to devise and give effect to measures which, by means of the combined powers of the community, might overconme the obstacles to civilization, arising out of the very circumstances of an infant colony;— to provide for the construction of roads and other public works useful to the whole community, and therefore to be constructed by general contributions;— to frame regulations adapted to unforseen or temporary exigencies;— in short, to give, to the Colonists laws and institutions suited to their new position. In doing this, it behoved the Council to weigh carefully the nature and extent of their powers, and where these appeared imperfect or inadequate, to take the proper measures to render them complete and effectual.

The Council therefore proceeded to consider the situation of the Colonists, in relation to the question of Sovereignty. Although willing to admit in the fullest extent the power and the right of the English Government to exercise Sovereignty within the Islands of New Zealand, whenever it may please the Legislature of England to assert that right, yet it appeared to the Council, that under the recent proclamations of the Governor of New South Wales, the English Government had formally disclaimed the existence of any right of Sovereignty in the Crown of England, and had in the amplest manner recognised the independent Sovereignty of the Native Chiefs of the Island. As that proclamation contains a reference to the acquisition by purchase of the sovereign rights of the Chiefs, the Council believe and hope, that, ere long, the authority of the English Crown will be established in this place. That authority does not, however, exist at the present moment. On the contrary, the Government of England has recognised every petty tribe in New Zealand as an independent foreign power, and has by implication asserted the right of the Chiefs to exercise authority over every person residing within their territories, according to the laws, or rather customs, of the tribe. Every act of Government therefore within the Colony, whether legislative or executive, must derive its validity from the assent, express or implied, of the principal Chiefs of the district. And every act of government thus sanctioned, must be recognised as valid by the Government of England and every civilized Government.

The Council being satisfied of the correctness of this view, deemed it their first duty to obtain from the Chiefs of this district, a ratification of the contract of government, signed in England by the Colonists. And as that contract was of necessity incomplete, inasmuch as its framers were unable to foresee the precise circumstances in which the Colonists would be placed in New Zealand, it was needful that the ratification should enlarge and modify the powers conferred by the original instrument. It further appeared incumbent upon the Council to secure to the Colonists the enjoyment of the laws of England, and that self-government by means of representatives chosen by the people, which is the birthright of every Englishman. So that whenever Great Britain shall acknowledge this Colony as one of its depencies, there may be nothing which requires alteration; and in the mean time the Colonists may enjoy the laws to which they have been accustomed, and the liberties to which as Englishmen they are entitled, and may provide by their representatives for the peace, order, and prosperity of the community.

In the modifications introduced into the original contract of government, the Council have endeavoured to secure the responsibility of the Government to the body of the Colonists, by making the Council subject to re-election at an early period; to secure to the Natives fair and equal treatment, by investing them with the same rights as the other inhabitants of the Colony, with the single exception of the right of voting at elections,— which has been deferred for a period sufficiently long to fit them for its exercise; to guard against any improper use of the Sovereignty recognised by the English Government as existing in the Chiefs, either from ignorance or from the incitement of designing or turbulent Europeans, by providing that they shall not perform any act of Sovereignty except through the instrumentality of the Council; and to obtain for the Colonists the amplest powers of administering their own affairs, by investing the President and the Council with full legislative and executive powers.

To the proposed ratification, the principal Chiefs of the district have given their fullest assent, and it now consequently forms the law of the Colony. It will remain such at least until this Colony shall be united with the British Empire; and the Council trust that even then it will continue to exist, subject only to the necessary alterations which such an union would involve. The Council, therefore, in submitting it to the Colony, confidently rely upon the concurrence and support of the Colonists. It has always been the boast of Englishmen, that their habits of obedience to the law, and respect for the rights of others, qualify them for the enjoyment of free institutions. Those habits have been, with very few exceptions, signally displayed in the short period that has elapsed since the foundation of the Colony, and the Council doubt not that they will continue to be manifested.

By order of the Council,
SAMUEL REVANS,
Secretary.

New Zealand Gazette and Wellington Spectator > 18 April 1840 > Page 2
https://paperspast.natlib.govt.nz/newspapers/NZGWS18400418.2.4