# Committee of Colonists
Saturday, 18 April 1840

Saturday, April 4, 1840.

A dispatch of 13th Setember, 1839, from the Board of Directors of the New Zealand Land Company was read. Its purporse was placing at the disposal of Colonel Wakeneld, £2000 for urgent purposes; the necessity for this expenditure to be shown by the endorsation of the drafts, for all or any part of it, of not less than three members of the Committe. This contingent fund was evidently suggested under the idea that some few months must elapse before taxation would meet the the expences of the Government of the colony. After the dispatch was read it was resolved:—

"..That Col. Wakefield, the Chief Agent of the New Zealand Land Company, be authorized to draw upon the Company for the sum of £1000, and that Messrs. Hanson, Hopper, and Hunter be requested to endorse the bills."

Dr. Evans and Mr. Hanson were then deputed to prepare an Address to the Colonists, to appear with the Constitution derived from the Chiefs of Port Nicholson.

Col. Wakefield having urged upon the Committee of Colonists the immediate necessity of his being provided with a Police Force, it was resolved:—

"That the President of the Committee be authorised to take such steps as he may find necessary for the establishment of a sufficient Constabulary Force; and that this Committee pledges itself to provide the funds for the payment of the same."

It was then resolved that the Committee should meet every Saturday, at 2'clock p.m. and that unless a quorum be present by half-past 2 o'clock, that the meeting adjourn for the day. For the present, the meetings are to be held at the private house of the President, who kindly placed his residence at the disposal of the Committee, for that purpose.

Saturday, April 11, 1840.

The Committee met.

Col. Wakefield stated that he had formed a Constabulory Force, to consist of a magistrate, two district constables,— one to reside at this end of the Bay, and the other at Thorndon,— each to have two petty constables subject to his control. That the expense of this portion of the establishment would amount to about £10 per week; and that the salary to be allowed the magistrate remained to be determined hereafter.

It was then resolved—

"That the magistrates and constables appointed by the President of the Committee shall respectively possess and exercise in this Colony all the powers which in England belong to the office of a justice of the peace and consthbles, so far as the same are applicable to this Colony."

Mr. Hanson and Dr. Evans submitted a draft of the Address which at the last meeting they were requested to prepare.

It was accepted, and ordered to be published in the forthcoming number of the "New Zealand Gazette." The thanks of the Committee were then voted to those gentlemen, for the able manner in which they had performed their task.

Upon the notices of motions given by Mr. Molesworth, that he would propose Mr. Hort, and by Mr. Hopper, that he would propose Mr. Barton to fill the vacancy occasioned by the retirement of Capt. W. M. Smith, R.A., being read,—

It was moved by Mr. H. Moreing, seconded by Mr. R. D. Hanson, that the election be postponed to this day three months. For, 4; against, 7; — majority, 3.

It was then moved by Mr. F. A. Molesworth, seconded by Mr. D: Sinclair, that Mr. A. Hort be elected to fill the vacancy occasioned by the retirement of Captain W. M. Smith, R.A., which was carried unanimously.

After the notice had been read, it was moved by Mr. George Duppa, seconded by the Hon. Henry Petre, that Mr. R. D. Hanson be elected Vice-President. Carried unanimously.

The Committee then adjourned.

New Zealand Gazette and Wellington Spectator > 18 April 1840 > Page 3
https://paperspast.natlib.govt.nz/newspapers/NZGWS18400418.2.9