### Tourism---OECD Comparisons

1. **TREVOR ROGERS (Howick) to the Minister of Tourism:** Has he received any reports on growth in tourism receipts for New Zealand compared to other OECD countries; if so, what do they show?

**Hon. JOHN BANKS (Minister of Tourism):** A report in The Economist this week showed New Zealand was the fifth fastest growing tourism market in the 1994 calendar year. Figures show that New Zealand's tourism receipts in United States dollars, and after adjusting for inflation, increased by about 12 percent.

***Trevor Rogers:*** Could the Minister advise what the indications are, if any, that this growth will continue in 1995?

**Hon. JOHN BANKS:** Because this Government set up the highly focused, accountable, and commercially orientated New Zealand Tourism Board, figures in both January and February of this year have shown increases in arrivals compared with the same month last year. January posted a 10.7 percent increase, and February posted a 3.3 percent increase. Almost 1,340,000 people visited New Zealand during the year ended February last.

***H V Ross Robertson:*** Can the Minister tell the House whether it is true that one of the key attractions for visitors to New Zealand is our national parks and other natural areas; and, if that is correct, what specific steps will he take to ensure that this year's budget of the Department of Conservation, which was cut by 1.5 percent, is bolstered to ensure that the ever-growing numbers of visitors will not destroy one of the main attractions for visitors to this country?

**Hon. JOHN BANKS:** Visiting our national parks is about fourth in priority for international tourists. First, of course, are the museums; second are historic sites and cultural sites; third is something else that I just missed; and fourth are our national parks. It is very important that we maintain our national parks in a state for visitors tomorrow as they were for visitors yesterday. I have confidence in the Minister for the Environment and confidence in the Minister of Conservation that they are doing that. There will always be a shortage of money. There will always not be enough money. The Government's priorities are such that the funding right now is adequate, given where we are at.