### Water---Auckland Supply

6. **RICHARD NORTHEY (Onehunga)** to the **Minister of Local Government:** In the light of reports of continuing disputes over Auckland's water supply between the Auckland Regional Services Trust, Watercare Services Ltd, and Auckland local authorities, will he promote an early amendment to the Local Government Act 1974 to restore responsibility for Auckland's water supply to the Auckland Regional Council or to territorial local authorities; if not, why not?

**Hon. JOHN BANKS (Minister of Local Government):** This Government will not be promoting an amendment to the Local Government Act to transfer Watercare Services Ltd to the Auckland Regional Council or the Auckland territorial constituent local authorities. The supply of bulk water to Auckland by Watercare Services Ltd is a regional function. Under this Government's policy on regional councils, as enacted in 1992, the service, delivery, and trading functions of the Auckland Regional Council were separated out from what the Government saw as the primary roles of regional councils---resource management and regulatory functions. These service deliveries and trading functions were given to the new regional services trust. It is not proposed to backtrack on these initiatives.

***Richard Northey:*** Just what antics will the Alliance members of the Auckland Regional Services Trust and Watercare Services Ltd have to get up to before the Minister is convinced that his predecessor's experiment of separate and divided responsibility through the Auckland Regional Services Trust and the like just does not work and should be ended before the next local body election?

**Hon. JOHN BANKS:** I would like to think that the regulatory functions of Watercare Services Ltd are separated from the philosophy, concepts, and principles of the Alliance political party in Auckland.

***Trevor Rogers:*** Is the Government taking any steps to try to prevent a repetition of the reported disputes between Watercare Services Ltd and the territorial local authorities in the Auckland region?

**Hon. JOHN BANKS:** Yes, a number of provisions in the Local Government (Law Reform) Bill currently before the House should serve to reduce the potential for future disputes. The measures include making it absolutely clear that Watercare Services Ltd can use a full range of mechanisms in meeting its funding requirements, including capital requirements in the medium term, short term, and long term; in requiring Watercare Services Ltd to provide more detailed information to customer territorial authorities and its funding mechanisms; and in clarifying the procedure by which territorial constituent authorities may subscribe for non-voting shares in Watercare Services Ltd.
<!--797-->
***Sandra Lee:*** Is the Minister aware that the Alliance-dominated regional services trust has single-handedly preserved the regional assets of Auckland from privatisation, and is that the reason the Minister has difficulty with it?

**Hon. JOHN BANKS:** The role of the Minister of Local Government is to see that these functions are carried out, not to referee any political scraps in Auckland between Alliance members and other parties. The Minister would hope that the Alliance members of the Auckland Regional Service Trust would get on with the job of supplying water to the Auckland constituents at a competitive price without shenanigans and rain-dancing.