### Watercare Services Ltd

3. **IAN REVELL (Birkenhead) to the Minister of Local Government:** Does the Government intend to propose amendments to legislation to allow the privatisation of Watercare Services Ltd?

**Hon. JOHN BANKS (Minister of Local Government):** It is not the Government's policy to privatise water, and no amendment to the Local Government Act will be made to allow the privatisation of Watercare Services.

***Ian Revell:*** Has the Minister received any reports that lead him to have particular concerns about the delivery of water under the present structures?

**Hon. JOHN BANKS:** Section 707(3) of the Local Government Act allows the Auckland Regional Services Trust to sell the share in its companies, Northern Disposals Ltd, Regional Forests Ltd, Transportation Auckland Corporation Ltd, and Ports of Auckland Ltd, except those relating to Watercare Services Ltd. Right now in Auckland the territorial local authorities, the Auckland Regional Council, and Watercare Services Ltd are involved in an in-depth study of medium and short-term requirements and functions that they are preparing for the Government.

***Richard Northey:*** Is it the case that Government proposals to privatise Radio New Zealand commercial stations, postal services, electricity, TV2, and other public services, have given people the impression that it is going to privatise Watercare---

**Mr SPEAKER:** Order!

***Rt Hon. Jonathan Hunt:*** I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. Why is that question in any way out of order? It was a short question related to the impression that the Government intends to privatise water.

**Mr SPEAKER:** No, it was not. Sometimes it is necessary to introduce a preamble to make the question intelligible. In that particular case the preamble was unduly long and not related to the question.

***Sandra Lee:*** Can the Minister confirm whether he or his department has ever sent any letter to any Auckland water provider stating that the present investigation of water and waste-water services will consider, among other things, the appropriate level of private involvement in water and waste-water supply?

**Hon. JOHN BANKS:** I can confirm that I have received information that Alliance members of local authorities in Auckland are up to no good on this issue.