### Estate Agents---Unlicensed

5. **Hon. WINSTON PETERS (Tauranga) to the Minister of Justice:** Has he obtained any estimate of the amount of money liable to be forfeit to the Crown by unlicensed real estate agents as set out in section 16 of the Real Estate Agents Act 1976; if not, why not?

**Hon. D A M GRAHAM (Minister of Justice):** No estimate has been obtained. Section 16 does not make forfeiture mandatory but, more important, applies when there is a conviction. There have been no recent convictions for acting as an unlicensed real estate agent.

***Hon. Winston Peters:*** Is it not the case that as a result of the ruling by Mr Justice Fisher in the High Court on 5 October last year declaring solicitors' property centres to be unlawful, the amount liable to be forfeit for such operations alone would run into many millions of dollars over the 7 years since such centres have been operating; if so, why is he as the Minister responsible so reluctant to collect that money owed to the Crown?

**Hon. D A M GRAHAM:** The Minister of Justice and the Department of Justice are not responsible for the prosecution of people under section 16 of the Act. That is a matter for the police or the Real Estate Institute.

***Hon. Winston Peters:*** What's the Minister going to do about it?

**Hon. D A M GRAHAM:** The member may put down a question for the Minister of Police and the "Minister in charge of real estate". A case was heard in the civil jurisdiction relating to the sale of land by solicitors acting as real estate agents. That is subject to appeal at the present time. As a result of that ruling I am sure the police or the Real Estate Institute will be either encouraged or dismayed.

***Peter Hilt:*** Has the Minister had his attention drawn to any proceedings that have been taken under section 16 of the Real Estate Agents Act; if so, what was the nature of those proceedings and what was the outcome?

**Hon. D A M GRAHAM:** As I understand the position, the Real Estate Institute brought proceedings under section 16 in the first place. The solicitors concerned then claimed damages in effect against the Real Estate Institute. They decided to resolve the matter by withdrawing both sets of proceedings and seeking a declaratory judgment. That has now been made and is subject to appeal.