### Accident Compensation---Advertising

4. **JIM ANDERTON (Sydenham) to the Minister for Accident Rehabilitation and Compensation Insurance:** Has he received information that the Accident Rehabilitation and Compensation Insurance Corporation's current advertising campaign, which covered television commercials, newspaper advertisements, radio advertisements, and associated publicity material, cost $2,568,688 and that the people appearing in the television commercials were paid for their appearance?

**Hon. BRUCE CLIFFE (Minister for Accident Rehabilitation and Compensation Insurance):** The approval and management of accident compensation advertising campaigns is entirely the responsibility of the management and board of the corporation. I am advised that the figure provided by the honourable member would possibly approximate the cost of the corporate advertising, including the case management and the injury prevention seat-belt campaign. Section 34 of the 1992 Act states that the corporation should undertake or fund safety programmes that are likely to result in a cost-effective reduction in premium rates.

***Jim Anderton:*** Given that the Minister has talked about effective accident-cost reduction, is he aware that the $2.6 million spent on an accident compensation promotion campaign represents 65 percent of the $3.9 million total spending on injury prevention last year by the corporation, and, if so, what action will he take to reorder accident compensation priorities?

**BRUCE CLIFFE:** I am sure most members of the House would agree that we can probably never spend sufficient money on injury prevention, particularly when one bears in mind that the figure of $2.6 million is only half the cost of one lifetime claim on the accident compensation corporation.

***John Robertson:*** Could the Minister advise the House more specifically about what the advertising campaign is meant to achieve?

**BRUCE CLIFFE:** We were hoping to promote awareness of the new case management scheme. When all the injury prevention campaigns---not the least being the rugby one, which costs our corporation $27 million a year---are added together, including the fraud campaign, the total cost is less than one-quarter of 1 percent of the turnover of the corporation.