### Prime Minister---United States Visit

2. **Rt Hon. HELEN CLARK (Leader of the Opposition)** to the **Prime Minister:** What are the agendas for his discussions with President Clinton and with American military leaders?

**Rt Hon. J B BOLGER (Prime Minister):** There is no formal agenda for my meetings either with President Clinton or with Secretary of Defense Perry and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The meetings will be held in Washington on Monday, 27 March. I expect that my discussions with President Clinton will be very wide ranging. I am sure a number of issues will be covered. We will want to discuss bilateral relations, which are now in good shape. I will be keen to explore with the President the many areas of common interest we share in the Asia-Pacific region, such as Asia Pacific Economic Co-operation and regional security developments. We will also discuss matters further afield such as Bosnia and peacekeeping in general. There are other challenges facing the United Nations that I will also pursue.

I look forward to discussing with the President our economic reforms and the opportunities these have opened up to build our strong trade, investment, and tourism links. In my meeting with Secretary of Defense Perry I will be keen to discuss issues such as non-proliferation and the security situation in the Asia-Pacific region, and to have dialogue on security issues that are now under way through the ASEAN regional forum. I will also be interested to obtain their views on trouble spots in the world, including Russia.

***Rt Hon. Helen Clark:*** Given the Prime Minister's statement this morning that he has no specific message to take to President Clinton, can he explain why he is not using the opportunity to take a specific message explaining New Zealand's nuclear-free policy to the President, explaining New Zealand's position on the United States' dumping of products in our markets, and explaining New Zealand's views on important regional issues?

**Rt Hon. J B BOLGER:** Both this United States Administration and the previous one are very well briefed and informed on New Zealand's security stance in relation to things nuclear. They have had a whole 11 years to reflect on it. I cannot believe that the honourable member is seriously suggesting that the United States Administration from the President down is not aware of our position.

***Rt Hon. David Lange:*** They are.

**Rt Hon. J B BOLGER:** They are; yes I agree. In terms of trade matters, clearly we will spend considerable time on trade issues, as I indicated, particularly to promote and advance the reform agenda of the Asia Pacific Economic Co-operation group of nations. We both have a very keen interest in that happening and we both work closely together on that agenda item. What else did the honourable member want to have a response to? I think the honourable member should show generosity of spirit and welcome this coming together at the highest political level of New Zealand and the United States. That would be the generous thing to do but that is too much for that member of the Labour Party.

***Joy McLauchlan:*** What are the Prime Minister's key objectives for his visit to the United States?

**Rt Hon. J B BOLGER:** All will now be revealed. [Interruption] It upsets them, does it not? They really get upset. If the Labour Party would do as every other Opposition party has done and wish the Prime Minister of the day good luck on major visits like this, it would not have this sense of tension. The key objective is to reopen a new chapter in New Zealand's relationship with the United States. Clearly this begins a new era in the relationship that has not been---

***Opposition Members:*** Oh!

**Rt Hon. J B BOLGER:** Members of the Labour Party might want to go "Oh!". That is about the depth of their intellectual capacity at the moment---they can say "Oh!".

***Pauline Gardiner:*** I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. I think my point of order might be well made already. This is one of the only forums in which we get to hear about things like this and I am afraid I cannot hear. And obviously you cannot hear my point of order.

**Mr SPEAKER:** The member makes a pertinent point. Some members in the House are fortunate enough to sit on the front benches and close to the Speaker. They ought not to infringe that privilege by interjecting so that members at the back of the House cannot hear.

**Rt Hon. J B BOLGER:** Because of the noise I had not concluded the answer. [Interruption] I am happy to debate this all afternoon if the right honourable leader of the Labour Party so wishes. The simple fact is that this does open a new era in the relationship between New Zealand and the United States. New Zealand does want to have the best possible relationship with the most powerful nation in the world. We have very important trade links with the United States. It is our third-largest market and second-largest source of inward goods to New Zealand. It is a huge resource in terms of investment in New Zealand, all of which have been constructive and positive. We have many, many values that the United States and New Zealand share.

I say again I am delighted that I am going. I know I will take the good wishes of the great majority of New Zealanders, even if that does not include the New Zealand Labour Party.