### Public Health Commission---Disadvantaged Children

3. **Rt Hon. HELEN CLARK (Leader of the Opposition)**, on behalf of **LIANNE DALZIEL (Christchurch Central)**, to the **Prime Minister:** Is it Government policy to support the Public Health Commission's proposal "That it initiates research on the impact of socio-economic disadvantage on the nutritional status of New Zealanders including the impact on children."; if so, what steps, if any, will he be taking to ensure that this proposal is actioned?

**Rt Hon. J B BOLGER (Prime Minister):** I am advised that this was one of a number of proposals in the Public Health Commission's national plan of action for nutrition that was published this month. It is not appropriate to take any one proposal out of context. With the transfer of the Public Health Commission to the Ministry of Health, the commission's research proposals along with aspects of the ministry's policy advice are being negotiated as part of the Minister's purchase agreement with the ministry. This is part of the budget process.

***Rt Hon. Helen Clark:*** Given the dramatic increase since 1990 in the number of children turning up at Auckland hospitals with iron deficiency anaemia---up to one-third of all such children---does the Prime Minister accept any responsibility on the part of his Government for this sad state of affairs, or does he blame the parents?

**Rt Hon. J B BOLGER:** Obviously parents have responsibility for their children. That is point one and that could never be removed. I obviously do not have information on the statistics, but I recall the Minister of Health rebutting some statistics from the member for Christchurch Central, who alleged that certain statistics indicated a certain trend. Those were rebutted very comprehensively by the Minister of Health last week.

***Rt Hon. Helen Clark:*** So the Prime Minister doesn't care?

**Rt Hon. J B BOLGER:** It is not a question of not caring. That is a most insensitive interjection made by the Leader of the Opposition. I care deeply that every child should be looked after but the first and primary responsibility is on the child's parents.

***Roger Sowry:*** Has the Prime Minister seen the school food programme study recently undertaken by the University of Otago on behalf of the Public Health Commission; if so, what comment does he have on that study?

**Rt Hon. J B BOLGER:** This has also been brought to my attention. The study provides some insight into the eating habits of school children and their families, and it is helpful in addressing education health policy. The study tells us that a significant number of children are missing vital meals and reinforces the need for children and their families to be educated on the importance of eating breakfast and lunch. The study made it clear that a significant number of schools noted that it was the students' own choice to miss breakfast. This is unsatisfactory from both a health and an educational perspective.