### Korea Energy Development Organisation

4. **JOHN ROBERTSON (Papakura) to the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade:** Further to his announcement that the Government has given financial support to the Korea Energy Development Organisation, what initiatives are expected from that organisation to reduce the threats to security in our region?

**Rt Hon. DON McKINNON (Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade):** The international consortium, the Korea Energy Development Organisation, was established as part of an agreement under which North Korea will freeze then dismantle its existing nuclear reactors, including two under construction. These reactors are of a design that facilitates production of weapons development rather than energy generation. The Korea Energy Development Organisation will replace these reactors with models that use light water technology. This produces little plutonium, so light water reactors will clearly be for energy generation. During the construction period the organisation will provide North Korea with heavy oil to supply the energy that the dismantled reactors would have produced.

***John Robertson:*** What is New Zealand's role within the Korea Energy Development Organisation?

**Rt Hon. DON McKINNON:** At this stage, beyond making a financial contribution to assist with the overall process, we have not made a decision on where we would fit in, but presumably we would wish to be involved in monitoring the progress. Being a part of the group of countries that has contributed, we would therefore wish to see an effective resolution ultimately determined.

***Hon. David Caygill:*** Can the Minister dispel the suggestion that the Government's decision at the time to contribute half a million dollars to the Korea Energy Development Organisation was in any way related to the Prime Minister's keenness at that time to be invited to visit the White House?

**Rt Hon. DON McKINNON:** Yes, I can. If the honourable member cared to look at the dates, and the juxtaposition of such dates, he would find there is no reason to reach such a conclusion. But I do remind the member that if he looked at the security issues in the Asia-Pacific area, he would see that North Korea was at the top of the list. Therefore, to make a contribution to reduce this problem area did not seem to me to be a difficult decision to come to.