### Nursing Services, Dannevirke

5. **JILL WHITE (Manawatu)** to the **Minister of Health:** What changes, if any, have been made to the public health nursing service in Dannevirke, and what consultation, if any, was undertaken with the local community before changes were implemented?

**Hon. JENNY SHIPLEY (Minister of Health):** Midcentral Health undertook an internal review in the middle of last year to ensure that people throughout the area receive a similar service, both in terms of access to public health nurses and in terms of the services that are provided by the Crown health enterprise. There was no public consultation, as this was an internal review that redistributed staff but did not change the overall service provided. The recommendations in the final report on the review are currently being implemented.

***Jill White:*** Given that the number of positions for generalist public health nurses in Dannevirke has been cut from two to one and that one position is to include asthma education, and that neither of the two nurses currently employed applied for the one position because of the impossible workload, what provision has been made to meet the present needs of the 15 schools, eight early-childhood groups, and over 150 families---some of whom are deemed to be at-risk families---that were using the public health nursing services?

**Hon. JENNY SHIPLEY:** The public health nurse system has been broken into two parts: one of which will provide adolescent health services and the other will provide pre-school/school health services. My understanding is that the Central Regional Health Authority is seeking to ensure that all Crown health enterprises provide appropriate public health nurses. I have no doubt that these positions will then be advertised if the existing appointees do not wish to continue in their work.
<!--546.801-->
***Nick Smith:*** How will Midcentral Health ensure the continuity of service during the change that is being planned?

**Hon. JENNY SHIPLEY:** During the transition period, children registered with the Dannevirke public health nurse will continue to be visited by public health nurses. However, these visits will be in line with the well-child schedule of visits that other families in the central region receive from Plunket. The public health nurses in Dannevirke will no longer actively compete with other well-child providers for the care of new infants, as has historically been the case in this area. As infants are born, the family will be transferred to services such as Plunket, which is contracted by the regional health authority to provide well-child checks for infants and toddlers to the age of 5. The home visits that occur as part of the focus on pre-school and school health will continue.