### Privacy Act---Schoolchildren

2. **JOY McLAUCHLAN (Western Hutt)** to the **Minister of Education:** Has he received any reports indicating where pre-schools and primary schools are using the Privacy Act 1993 as a reason for not passing on the names of students to the most likely school that the children will move up to?

**Hon. Dr LOCKWOOD SMITH (Minister of Education):** I have not received any reports indicating that pre-schools and primary schools are using the Privacy Act as a reason for not passing on the names of students to schools or to the school most likely to enrol that student next.

***Joy McLauchlan:*** Are schools restricted from passing on the names of students to the most likely school that children will move to?

**Hon. Dr LOCKWOOD SMITH:** The Privacy Act recognises a number of exceptions to what would otherwise constitute an invasion of privacy. One of these enables information to be disclosed when disclosure is consistent with the purpose for which the information was obtained. It is debatable whether passing student names or records on to the student's next school can be classified as directly related to the purposes for which the information was obtained. Schools could ensure that the information was directly related by making it clear at enrolment time that such information would follow the student to the next school.

***Hon. Margaret Austin:*** What action has the Minister or his ministry taken to ensure that the 389 children identified in the Gazette of 29 March 1994 have been located and are attending school when, in fact, they had not enrolled by the end of March 1994---a situation in which inaction is leading to children not receiving an education?

**Hon. Dr LOCKWOOD SMITH:** I cannot possibly answer the honourable member's question. I have no idea of the whereabouts of the children she is referring to who were identified in the Gazette of March 1994. If the honourable member is genuinely concerned about them she can put the question down in writing and we will chase the matter up.