### Food Banks

7. **Hon CLIVE MATTHEWSON (Dunedin West)** to the **Prime Minister:** Has he ever put forward a suggestion that it may be appropriate for the Government to fund food banks directly; if so, what were his reasons for making such a suggestion?

**Rt Hon. J B BOLGER (Prime Minister):** In 1993 I asked for a report on a suggestion that the Government could provide financial assistance to food banks to help them stock up for the Christmas period. A reason for doing so was to discover whether there were arguments that I had not considered <!--546.802-->that might cause the Government to change its policy. This is normal and reflects my concern to ensure that all aspects of policy are carefully explored. I concluded that it was not appropriate for the Government to fund food banks directly. Government funding should continue to be delivered through our comprehensive social security system.

***Hon. Clive Matthewson:*** Given that food bank usage has increased by over 1,200 percent from when the National Government took office until the date on which the Prime Minister made that suggestion, why really did he back down on the suggestion that he made?

**Rt Hon. J B BOLGER:** It is not a question of backing down at all. Quite simply, I asked for a report on a suggestion that had been put to me. I received it and I believe that the decision that was made is absolutely correct---that is, that support for people in need should come through the welfare system. If the welfare system is shown to be inadequate in some shape or form, then this House, through its legislative programme, should amend it. It is as simple as that.