### School Enrolments

8. **IAN REVELL (Birkenhead)** to the **Minister of Education:** How many names of students turned away from their local school has he received this year from the member for Yaldhurst?

**Hon. Dr LOCKWOOD SMITH (Minister of Education):** The member for Yaldhurst has provided me with the names of three students out of the 650,000 pupils returning to school, whose parents were unable to gain access to the school of their choice.

***Ian Revell:*** What action has he taken in relation to the three cases provided by the member for Yaldhurst?

**Hon. Dr LOCKWOOD SMITH:** Information provided by the member for Yaldhurst of three cases in which students were unable to attend the school of their choice was forwarded to the Secretary for Education. All three cases were known to the ministry, but in only one case had the ministry received a formal application under section 12B of the Education Act 1989. In one case a school was directed to enrol the student because there was no other school the student could reasonably attend. In the other two cases the ministry declined to make a direction for the enrolment, on the grounds that there were other schools that the students could reasonably practicably attend.

***Hon. Margaret Austin:*** Will the Minister confirm that he has received directly---and I have copies of the cases---at least 16 further cases and his ministry more than 50 cases that are seeking intervention under section 12A of the Education Act 1989, and that so far all but one---the one he has mentioned---have been declined despite legal advocacy for some; in that case what is the point of my adding further to his paper war?

**Hon. Dr LOCKWOOD SMITH:** I am sure the honourable member did not intend to mislead the House. The ministry has not received more than 50 applications; it has received 41 applications under section 12B, and 14 of those have been withdrawn by the people who lodged them. On four occasions so far the ministry has directed a school to enrol the student concerned. I am sorry; the member's information to the House was factually false.

***Hon. Winston Peters:*** Why is the Minister purveying the opinion that these grievances are minimal, when, in fact, in one school in Tauranga---and he must know of it, because his ministry mediated---three students were of the type that the member for Yaldhurst mentioned, and when we multiply that by a factor around the country it is very likely that the number is far higher than he talking about?
<!--546.803-->
**Hon. Dr LOCKWOOD SMITH:** I recognise that the honourable member is not familiar with education around the country. In fact, there is roll growth in the Tauranga and Papamoa areas. Schools are under pressure in his area, but that is not the case on the West Coast of the South Island, over most of the South Island, or even over most of the North Island. In fact, the first new school being built is in Papamoa, which is in that honourable member's electorate.