### Benefits---School Lunches

1. **Hon CLIVE MATTHEWSON (Dunedin West)** to the **Prime Minister:** Has he seen the comments of Salvation Army spokesman Peter Savage, that "On a benefit there is just not enough discretionary spending to cope with the regular essential expenses as well as the weekly food bill."; if so, does he stand by his assertion that it is "very difficult to accept that there are any homes that would have insufficient income to provide either breakfast or a school lunch."?

**Rt Hon. J B BOLGER (Prime Minister):** I have seen the comment and I stand by my original assertion. New Zealand has a comprehensive and flexible social security system that is designed to and does meet the needs of most families. When careful monitoring suggests that a valid need exists and is not being met, the Government makes the necessary changes. A number of enhancements have been announced in recent months to meet identified need.

***Hon. Clive Matthewson:*** If things are going so well and the Government is so responsive, how come, last year, the Salvation Army alone gave food to more than 75,000 people genuinely in need, and is this state of affairs what he meant when he solemnly and unblinkingly promised New Zealanders a decent society?

**Rt Hon. J B BOLGER:** I stand by my statement that I want to achieve a decent society in New Zealand, and say to the honourable member that he might join me in that ambition. I repeat that New Zealand has, under this Government---as there was under the previous Labour Government---a comprehensive and flexible social welfare system designed to meet the needs of those who require assistance. It is set up by statute. It is amended from time to time as additional needs are identified, and so it will be in the future.

***Peter McCardle:*** Can the Prime Minister advise the House of the specific enhancements made to the social security system recently, and can he advise whether these include reducing the special-benefit deficiency to $10, which was $45 under the Labour Government?

**Rt Hon. J B BOLGER:** There is a long list and I think it would test the patience of the House if I went through them all. But I can confirm the last point the honourable member made, that the Government has announced that, as from 1 April 1995, the $20 gap between essential commitments and income will be halved to $10---and he correctly reminded the House that the amount was $45 when Labour was in power. We have also seen increases in standard benefits and allowances and enhanced family support in the last two Budgets. Special-needs grants for food were relaxed at the end of last year, and the accommodation supplement has been increased across the country for all single people and, in Wellington---because of different housing costs---for married couples and sole parents with one child.

The list goes on but I can confirm that the best contribution we have been able to achieve is the 75,000 additional jobs last year.

***Hon. Winston Peters:*** I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. The termination of the Prime Minister's answer just about speaks volumes here, but it truly cannot be right that the whole country and this House should be bored witless by an answer that is largely irrelevant, outside Speakers' rulings and the Standing Orders, not relevant, not to the point, and not really exact in any way.

**Mr SPEAKER:** I will confess that I thought the answer was unduly long. I do wish Ministers would simply state the answer to the question they are asked and no more. I understand that from time to time, having regard for the type of question asked, it is sometimes necessary to expand it. Perhaps the Prime Minister will now finish his answer.

**Rt Hon. J B BOLGER:** The question asked for me to identify the enhancements.

***Hon. Winston Peters:*** I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. With no disrespect, you agreed that the Prime Minister had gone on unduly long. Now you are going to give him a second chance.

**Mr SPEAKER:** No, I am not giving him a second chance. Nor am I giving him a chance to explain. He should simply complete his answer.

**Rt Hon. J B BOLGER:** I listed a number of areas in which the Department of Social Welfare enhanced the provision of support. I could go on longer, but in deference to your suggestion, Mr Speaker, I will not.