### State Highway 1---Traffic Lanes

6. **Hon ROB STOREY (Waikato)** to the **Minister of Transport:** What reports, if any, has he received on progress with the four-laning of State Highway 1 from Auckland to Cambridge?

**Hon. MAURICE WILLIAMSON (Minister of Transport):** Transit New Zealand has reported to me on progress with four-laning of State Highway 1 from Auckland to Cambridge. The report advises that tenders have been advertised for the Pokeno bypass, south of Pokeno to Mercer is already under construction, and from Mercer to Te Onetea---just north of Ohinewai---options have been under discussion with local landowners and interest groups for some considerable time, and a number of public meetings have already been held. Further public meetings have been scheduled to culminate in the completion of the environmental impact assessment. Following publication of the environmental impact assessment, resource consents for the four-laning will be sought. The first section for consent application is currently planned for July or August this year.

***Hon. Rob Storey:*** Has the Minister received any reports in relation to the Ohinewai to Cambridge section?

**Hon. MAURICE WILLIAMSON:** Yes. I have been advised that a consultant has just been appointed to complete the development of the four-laning strategy from Ohinewai to Cambridge. This work is due for completion in March 1997. Transit New Zealand has also informed me that a number of scoping studies at local communities such as Huntly and Ngaruawahia have been published for some time and there has already been discussion at local community level.

***Suzanne Sinclair:*** Given the daily increase in congestion on other portions of State Highway 1, such as the Auckland Harbour Bridge, what reports, if any, has the Minister sought to do something about it?

**Hon. MAURICE WILLIAMSON:** I can assure the member that the entire network of roading in New Zealand is under constant evaluation and projects are based on a transparent cost-benefit ratio analysis. The best and most deserving project is allocated funding first.