<!--546.805-->
# POINTS OF ORDER---QUESTIONS PROCEDURE

**Hon. WINSTON PETERS (Tauranga):** I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. It concerns a very serious matter---a development in our questions procedure that I regard as serious for this Parliament, and I want you to bear me out. I am not talking here about the increasingly common practice whereby Ministers are allowed to deviate or breach Standing Order 87 requiring them to keep their answers strictly relevant to and within the confines of the questions asked, and I am not expecting you to provide the House with a ruling now, but I want you if you can to consider this matter over the next few days and provide this House with a ruling.

My concern in this matter has been growing for some time and has been triggered in this case by the written reply served up by the Minister for Crown Health Enterprises to question on notice No. 15 last Thursday from the member for Christchurch Central. I would be happy for you to see a copy of the question if you do not have it, so that you can see what I am talking about.

In the question the member for Christchurch Central sought some simple information about expenditure by a Crown health enterprise, which is clearly within the Minister's portfolio of responsibilities. The Minister replied that he did not have the information, and had not bothered to seek it. In my view this brings the meaning of question time to a new low. I ask you to consider how acceptable a standard of answer this is. The opportunity for members to ask questions is a key aspect of ensuring the accountability that Parliament exists to provide. That is why we are here.

Question time in this Parliament is becoming increasingly an unequal exercise. The requirements that members must comply with in submitting questions are very stringent, but it seems that once we have got through the barriers, Ministers can treat members---indeed, Parliament itself---with contempt. I invite you to read the answer to that question. If Ministers are allowed to continue getting away with devices and practices that marginalise question time, then Parliament is just debasing itself, and as Speaker---the guardian of Parliament's integrity---I think you need to be concerned about that. I am asking for your considered ruling on whether the refusal of a Minister even to seek the information he is asked in a properly submitted question to provide, is, first, acceptable, and, second, is to be allowed to establish a precedent for a new low in ministerial accountability and thus to reduce the right of members of Parliament and the actions of members of Parliament to an utter farce.

**Mr SPEAKER:** I take to heart the points made by the member. I think this would be an appropriate time for me to consider that matter in detail and to come back with a ruling at a later date.

**MICHAEL LAWS (Hawke's Bay):** I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. It is a matter associated with the point of order raised by the member for Tauranga and also with the matter of written questions. I have raised this matter before in this House and I want to raise it again.

Today I have due to me a large number of replies to written questions that concern a very important issue---and the member for Napier and the member for Hastings will attest to that. They are to do with the recent demotion of a member of the board of directors of Healthcare Hawke's Bay. It is a particularly important matter, which concerns over $100 million.

Those written replies were due today and they have not been delivered. I have just checked the Bills Office and they are not there. I have to say also that replies to previous written questions of mine---if such answers have been supplied---have been supplied days late.

I have just read Speakers' rulings 133/3 to 133/5. I can accept the fact that when we lodge questions that those questions are not necessarily printed on the Order Paper on the day on which they are due, but the reason that we lodge written questions and that they are then given a due date for the replies <!--546.806-->is to give adequate notice to Ministers---in this case the Minister for Crown Health Enterprises---that those particular replies are due on that date.

Now I do not know whether it is an inefficiency in the Minister's office or in the accountability mechanism between the Crown health enterprises and the company advisory unit, but I have to say that this is becoming increasingly common. In essence it is abdicating the responsibility of members of this House to be able to call to account taxpayer-funded institutions such as Crown health enterprises.

**Mr SPEAKER:** I will give that matter some consideration but I draw it to the member's attention that the replies that he mentioned, which are due for return today, are not yet out of time.

**GEOFF BRAYBROOKE (Napier):** I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. I want to endorse the matter that the member for Hawke's Bay has just raised. I wish to inform the House that as far as questions go, especially those concerning Healthcare Hawke's Bay, it is easier to pull teeth. Let me give an example. I lodged many written questions on 2 March. The replies to three of those are still outstanding and have not come back. In fact, I got two back today, 22 March, which should have been back on 14 March. Those are all to do with Healthcare Hawke's Bay, and it is just not good enough.

**Hon. PAUL EAST (Minister for Crown Health Enterprises):** First of all, I understand that the member for Tauranga has been complaining about an answer given to a question asked by the member for Christchurch Central, and it seems to be rather a coincidence that these members have suddenly all arrived with this issue at the same time. But I would think that the number of questions relating to Hawke's Bay and south Auckland probably equals the number of all the other questions about all the other Crown health enterprises. That places enormous demands on the hospitals concerned, and I would think that the same members would be the first to complain if there were too many bureaucrats there answering questions and not enough doctors and nurses in the ward.

So there has to be a balance, and there have been an enormous number of questions. Now, should we hire a whole lot of extra staff for a sudden peak in activity in one Crown health enterprise? No.

**Mr SPEAKER:** There is obviously some disquiet about question period, and I must tell members that I am personally rather concerned about the way in which question period is being conducted. I will give the matter some consideration and come back with a ruling shortly.