**Hon. Dr LOCKWOOD SMITH (Minister of Education):** I move, That the House take note of miscellaneous business. On 30 January, the Labour Party signalled a major campaign on education. The Leader of the Opposition issued a statement in which she said things like: "The Minister of Education has to take direct responsibility for problems schools are facing. He cannot be let off the hook." She went on to say Labour is "promoting positive policies to solve the problems!" Well, she got off to a pretty good start! The New Zealand Herald printed at the bottom of page 5: "Labour attack on education." And Labour followed up pretty well: that same day the Leader of the Opposition put out a statement announcing its zoning Bill.

Then the following day there was a lot of action! The Leader of the Opposition put out another statement: "Hundreds of students are being turned away from schools because of overcrowding problems." We said: "Look, the Government is prepared to make sure it helps with this problem. Please give us the names of the students and we will make sure the needs of those students are addressed." What happened? How many names did we get? We got two, first off. Hundreds of students are being turned away, and we got two names! A few days later those names were followed <!--546.807-->up with one more name. Out of the hundreds of students being turned away, the Opposition provided three names when the Government said that it would help.

Then what happened? On 1 February, also issued from the office of the Leader of the Opposition, came another statement that criticised the Government for announcing 19 new schools. The Government announced 19 new schools, and what happened? The Opposition with its constructive policies on education attacked us for announcing 19 new schools. Then there was a bit of a delay before the next round. On 13 February, though, the office of the Leader of the Opposition---again---put out a statement, and this is a beauty: "[The Minister of Education's] fantasy world shattered." I really wanted to read this one to see what was in it. It went on: "The Prime Minister must act." I wonder what the Leader of the Opposition wanted the Prime Minister to do about my fantasy world. I went on and read the statement. It contained absolute drivel.

Then what happened? We got a little flurry of statements, all from the office of the Leader of the Opposition, dated 14 February, 15 February---two of them came out on that date---then 17 February. This time we got: "Twenty thousand students a year being suspended from school." Well, how many students are being suspended from school? We find that the Leader of the Opposition is misleading the public probably just by about 300 percent. She was about 300 percent wrong in her public statement. But that does not matter, the rhetoric sounds good. Then what happened? On 21 February another couple of statements came from the Leader of the Opposition---I do not know what had happened to the poor spokesperson on education during that period.

Two of those statements came on 21 February, then came the granddaddy or the grandmother of them all on 27 February: "Campus campaign launched." I could not find it in any newspaper anywhere. But there was the big statement: "Campus campaign launched. National's big fees hike stop another generation of university students." What are the facts? If National's tertiary policy is stopping students, how come the number of women in tertiary institutions has increased by 58 percent under this Government? How come the number of Maori in tertiary institutions has increased 136 percent under this Government? How come the number of Pacific Islanders in tertiary institutions has increased by 94 percent---almost doubled---under this National Government? If that is the best the Leader of the Opposition can do, then what a pathetic campus campaign!

What happened a few days later? The associate spokesperson on education, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, went out to talk to students. What happened? He got booed. That is what the students thought of this campus campaign. The associate spokesperson got booed.

Then what happened? The Leader of the Opposition ran out of puff. From 27 February until today the Parliamentary Library was able to find just two more statements. The Leader of the Opposition ran out of puff. What did the Leader of the Opposition say? She said the Labour Party would be announcing policies that would solve the problems. But what has it done in that time? It has announced its zoning Bill. What a great policy! It forces zones on to 85 percent of schools that do not need them.

But that is not the silliest bit of it. Do members know what the silliest bit of it is? The silliest bit of it is that the Labour Party would take away the law requiring every school to enrol every student who seeks to enrol, unless it has an enrolment scheme. That is how stupid that zoning Bill is. That is the only constructive attempt the Opposition has made.

What has the Government done in that same time? On 10 January the Government announced the decisions made in the Todd report. That gives tertiary institutions certainty right through to the turn of the century. The Government announced that 70,000 more New Zealanders would be getting into <!--546.808-->tertiary education, and tens of millions of dollars would be invested in tertiary education. On 25 January we announced the review of careers information and guidance and we established a review panel to look at that vitally important part of information provision to young students. On 13 February we announced extra assistance for English education for speakers of other languages. On 23 February, in the Budget policy statement, we made it very clear that education was going to be the big winner in this year's Budget.

Investing in our future, released that same day, announced that the Government was going to be building dozens more schools. We announced at least 34 more schools, and that we would put hundreds more teachers into our classrooms. The Government made it very clear it was prepared to pay our good teachers more. The Government announced in this document a massive investment in education over the next 3 years.

On 5 March the Government announced a special-education policy. It was a special-education policy setting up a national advisory committee. This committee will be finalising the national policy guidelines, and finalising the new criteria for special education to establish the resources that students should have. On 15 March the ministerial reference group announced its report recommending over 850 more teachers for schools in this country. Over $140 million will be spent in schools over the next 3 years. What is more, the ministerial reference group achieved consensus, with the exception of the Post Primary Teachers Association, on the issue of direct resourcing. Labour legislated for it but could not bring it in. At least this Government has got an agreement that it should be an option available to schools. On 20 March the Government announced to education sector groups that it was committed to working on a unified pay system for our teachers.

Contrast that programme of action in education with that litany of press statements, that rhetoric, and that drivel issued from the office of the Leader of the Opposition. Contrast that action with that litany of drivel. If one looks to the future, in Education in the 21st Century, it will be seen that the Government has announced its vision of a seamless education system starting right from birth. This is done with the new programme of Parents as First Teachers, the new curriculum guidelines for early-childhood education, the new New Zealand school curriculum, the new qualifications framework, the new Skill New Zealand strategy, the second-chance education provision that links into the national qualifications framework, and tertiary education that provides tertiary opportunities for thousands more students.

I say this to the Labour Party today. Last week it ignored the biggest announcement in education for years. It chose to ignore education but it says it is vitally important. I challenge you to debate the education issue and to put your money where your mouth is.

**Hon. WINSTON PETERS (Tauranga):** I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. This may be a minor point but I do not think you should be referred to in this manner---being told to put your money where your mouth is. This Minister, I know he is a new one, should know the Standing Orders.

**Mr SPEAKER:** I am sure the Minister knows he ought to refer to members in the third person.

**Rt Hon. HELEN CLARK (Leader of the Opposition):** I would like to start by thanking the Minister for reading all those marvellous press statements I put out over the last few weeks. I know he did not have a lot of time to prepare for the debate. I did hear from sources out of the library that he had asked them to go through and find out all the statements that I put out. Could the Minister, for next week, ask the library to research the wonderful statements issued by my colleague the spokesperson on education? She puts out many statements, which all put that pathetic Minister on the spot. Earlier this year Labour did raise in this House the crisis that existed in education. We spoke---
<!--546.809-->
***Hon. Roger McClay:*** I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. The member did make a statement a few minutes ago that I think sounded rather serious. It affects the performance of staff in this building. It was with respect---

**Mr SPEAKER:** There has been no infringement of the Standing Orders.

**Rt Hon. HELEN CLARK:** We spoke earlier this year in the House of the Government's policy of letting market forces rip through the education system. We spoke of the policy of letting winner and loser schools develop, and the implications of that for children. We spoke of the growing inequalities in the New Zealand public education system. I know that the Minister does not care, just as the Minister of Finance does not care less about growing inequality in New Zealand generally. We spoke of that Minister's failure to plan adequately for children coming into our school system. We spoke of the fact that children are being turned away from overcrowded schools in their own suburbs because he cannot plan for the numbers. We spoke of the huge class sizes. We spoke of the teacher shortages. We spoke of the issue of teacher morale. We spoke of the underfunding of our schools.

The fact is that parents are being called on now to fund, not just the extras, but the basics, because he has let the operational grants sink down in value. We spoke of the Government's prejudice against the small schools and the rural schools, and we spoke of how it has let them down.

The Government knows it has a crisis on its hands in education. That is why, when it went to caucus at Paihia, the Minister was told to get on top of his portfolio. He should, because his administration of it is a shambles. In a panic, after being told to fix the crisis, he rushes out a few announcements. School staffing! We have taken a week to have a good look at the details. I have to say that it is the old story of too little, too late. After years of cutting back on numbers of teachers, in a panic he has decided he needs more. God knows how he will get them out of thin air. He has cut back our teachers colleges. In one year from 1991 to 1992 he cut back the money spent on training teachers by 15.8 percent. Between 1991 and 1994 the teachers colleges have suffered a 26 percent cut in funding. They are now expected to somehow turn out 800 new teachers from nowhere. That is the Minister who cut out some 300 teaching positions from our secondary schools in 1992.

***Geoff Braybrooke:*** How many?

**Rt Hon. HELEN CLARK:** It was some 300 positions. What is being given back? About 100 positions! The Minister is out of his depth. He will not want to tell the House that in one of the many reviews---the review on provisions protecting surplus teachers---commissioned prior to the "mother of all Budgets" he was told that rolls would increase by 14 percent over the next 10 years. He was told by officials that the Government could not afford to reduce the supply of teachers. And he took positions out of teaching.

Those staffing announcements confirm that this Government has no interest in the small children. When the Labour Government was in office it was working toward class sizes of 1:20 in the junior classes. The Minister abandoned that. He has gone now to a dream of 1:23. He has taken away resourcing from schools that enjoyed the 1:20 staffing. These staffing announcements amount to robbing Peter to pay Paul. I say that they shift resources from small schools to large schools, from rural schools to urban schools, and from poor schools to rich schools. That is the effect of those announcements. Is it not interesting that not one school in Remuera loses a teacher? Porirua suffers a net loss of teachers. The Taipa Area School in the Far North loses 2.05 teachers, exactly the same as the largest State school in Fendalton gained. The Patea High School loses 15 percent of its staff from those changes while Wellington College, with half a million dollars picked up from the parents paying fees, gets an extra 2.2 teachers. If anything convinces me that the National Government has forgotten <!--546.810-->who voted for it in the rural areas, it is looking at what has happened to rural schools with these staffing schedules. The big losers are Patea, Whangaroa College, Tokomairiro High School, MacKenzie College, Methven, Fiordland, Temuka, and so on. Those staffing announcements have a very serious effect on our rural schools.

A school like Turakina Maori Girls College loses one-quarter of its staff. It loses 2.6 teachers, knowing that each teacher lost is a loss of six classes of 4 hours a week---a loss of disastrous proportions for a small school like that.

In these announcements the Government said that rural schools should explore more innovative ways of enhancing curriculum delivery. Well what was that a code for? It is a code for telling them that they can link up with a computer to somewhere. The teachers, the parents, and the kids know that technology is a wonderful thing as an enhancement of what the school can offer but it is not a substitute for a teacher. When we read of Brother Pat Lynch, one of the Minister's confidants, saying that kids working on computers can be supervised by volunteers, we have to ask what our State schools are coming to. Will they be supervised by grandmothers as volunteers? I am sure there are grandmothers who are willing to volunteer but it is not the same as a registered teacher in a small school delivering a course face to face.

It is not just the rural schools from whom the cry of anguish has come. It is also from the high schools in our poorer suburbs, which are relatively small, that are badly affected by these staffing announcements. They point out in their letters to the Minister and the Prime Minister, which they are good enough to send us copies of, that just having equality of provision---student for student, teacher for teacher---does not mean equity of provision when it comes to teaching.

The students in our disadvantaged communities need the extra support that they have been given. Under the Labour Government there was a strong commitment to equity funding. That meant more resources for the least advantaged. Over the last 4 years this Minister has systematically stripped that away. I have figures here for a secondary school with 570 students. That school loses half a teacher. It has lost $16,500 through the change from equity funding to so-called targeted funding for educational achievement. Schools like that throughout New Zealand feel shortchanged by this Minister.

I am pleased that Labour has taken a week to look in detail at these figures announced by the Government. We do our homework, unlike the Minister of Education, and I stand in this House to say without contradiction that those announcements are a con by a Minister who could not care less about growing inequality in education.

**Rt Hon. JONATHAN HUNT (Senior Opposition Whip):** I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. As the Minister of Education had another 3 minutes of speaking during the course of the speech of the Leader of the Opposition, I would hope that you might adjust the speaking-times of the Opposition and the Government accordingly.

**Mr SPEAKER:** Would the member please explain.

**Rt Hon. JONATHAN HUNT:** I counted the time he spoke during the course of the speech of the Leader of the Opposition. It was 3 minutes of interjections.

**Hon. JOHN LUXTON (Associate Minister of Education):** I think it is good this debate today is focusing on education, because education is the biggest investment in our nation's future. It is probably the most important single area of Government expenditure. I believe there has been substantial improvement in the taxpayers dollars that have been spent on education over the last 5 years; there have been substantial changes and substantial increases in public spending on this area.
<!--546.811-->
The difficulty the Labour Party has is that it cannot actually find a clear target to focus on in education, because overall it is going so well. It is quite a marked turn-round from the period in the late 1980s when Labour was in all sorts of trouble with the changes under the "tomorrow's schools" policy. Unfortunately whilst Opposition members have said they are going to target education as it is a high profile area that they believe is having some difficulties, they have made absolutely no impact in the news media and even less impact in the education sector and in communities.

We have heard all sorts of gross exaggerations about letting market forces rip through education, and about growing inequalities. Those members forget we are now seeing real growth, real innovation, and real new philosophies come into education, and growing equality in education, which has long been absent in parts of the sector. We are now seeing accountability in areas in which there has never been accountability before. As a result there has to be change, and those changes are beginning to occur.

We have also seen the anomalies of past funding "fix-it" arrangements, particularly by Labour members responding to lobbying from the Post Primary Teachers Association and the like. The Labour Government often just responded with band-aid after band-aid. When, for example, the system of funding teacher salaries is taken apart, we find there are up to four awards for the same job. Members of the Labour Government never actually got around to dealing with that. We have now a Minister and a Government that are starting to look at things that for so many years were left in the too-hard basket.

Labour members never work on being rational when it comes to the employment of staff in the educational sector. When we announced last week 800 new teacher jobs, what did they do but criticise. All that the Leader of the Opposition did in the last 10 minutes was criticise the employment of 800 new teachers.

***Rt Hon. Helen Clark:*** Not enough; too late.

**Hon. JOHN LUXTON:** Not enough! She then went on to say that 30 schools will lose out. What about the other ones that will gain because of the 800 new teachers?
I move on to the early-childhood sector. That is another area in which there have been substantial change and improvement in processes under this Government's policies.

***Rt Hon. Helen Clark:*** The Government has cut funding.

**Hon. JOHN LUXTON:** In actual fact, since 1990 we have doubled the funding of the early-childhood sector. I do not know from whom in the library she is getting her information, but to suggest that the Government has cut funding of the pre-school sector is absolute nonsense, because it has more than doubled State funding of the early-childhood sector. The number of early-childhood sector child hours funded by the State has more than doubled, and we have seen a huge growth in private sector funding of early-childhood education. The whole sector is growing quite fantastically. That has to happen to education when there is community involvement, community ownership, and a major public contribution towards the growth of that sector.

We have made enormous progress in that sector, actually targeting groups that previously never came within the early-childhood education ambit. Young Maori and Pacific Island children missed out completely until changes were brought about recently. Sure, there is still work to be done and more progress to be made, and that is one of the reasons we are still working through a funding review aimed at focusing on quality early-childhood education.
<!--546.812-->
It is interesting that we still hear again and again from the Labour Opposition that funding of the early-childhood sector has been cut. Funding has doubled. The Labour Opposition tends to focus on small sections of the huge, diverse sector of early-childhood education. Some 25 different philosophies keep competing to provide early-childhood education.

Opposition members tend to criticise, whinge, and whine about what is happening to tertiary education. Let us go back and look at what has happened. Student numbers at universities, colleges of education, and polytechnics increased from 165,000 in 1991 to over 200,000 in 1994. That is a substantial increase in tertiary education, and the Labour Opposition goes on complaining about funding cuts.

In actual fact, funding of the tertiary sector is at record levels, funding of the pre-school sector is at record levels, and funding of the school sector is at record levels. Funding of education provided by the State is at record levels in the current financial year. Yet members opposite continue to say "Spend more." They do not say how we should spend it. They say "Provide more in some areas." They do not tell us which areas. They do not seem to have a policy on education at all. What would they do that we are not doing?

***Hon. Dr Lockwood Smith:*** Would they throw out the curriculum?

**Hon. JOHN LUXTON:** Would they change the curriculum changes? Would they change the overall education philosophy we now have of seamless education, of allowing people to move from one sector to another---all the fantastic changes that recognise that education must change in a changing society?

For too long the Labour Party has tended to focus on taking advice from the teachers' unions, which, quite frankly, have lacked a vision of where education should go. I have heard this from principals up and down the country. They have spoken about the biggest handicaps to progress and innovation in education today being the lack of vision of the Post Primary Teachers Association and, at times, the New Zealand Educational Institute. I believe that the New Zealand Educational Institute is now coming back to a more visionary approach, and is actually recognising that the changes made by the Government are for the long-term good of children. That is what education is about.

Input has to come from the communities. The communities decide what the outcomes in education should be. They must be ever-improving skills and learning, rather than ever-increasing pandering to one or two strong union leaders, which has tended to happen in the past, particularly in the post-primary sector of education. [Interruption] One can hear Labour Opposition members rising to it. They do not like to hear the truth about the lack of vision of some of their mates in the education sector. But there is vision in education, and it is starting to show some quite fantastic changes.

For example, we have seen a doubling in the number of Maori tertiary graduates over the last 5 years. We have seen rapid growth in that sector, and a marked increase in involvement of young Maori in education. That really is the only long-term policy that will work to bring Maori outcomes up to the level of the rest of society. The answer has to be education. Unfortunately Labour does not see that. The members opposite come from a background of knocking, whingeing, and whining. They will never give credit where credit is due.

We have made policy changes that advance education. Let us look again at the early-childhood sector. We have never seen such dynamism, such innovation, such change as is coming spontaneously from within that sector now that it is no longer captured by the providers, as it was for so long in the past. Twenty-five different, diverse philosophies are all competing, all saying they have the best <!--546.813-->philosophy, and providing real growth and innovation in the pre-school sector. That type of education augurs well for this country.

**Hon. MARGARET AUSTIN (Yaldhurst):** The Associate Minister of Education is not very convincing. For 2 weeks in a row the Government has launched into a debate on education. In my book that means only one thing: the Government is under pressure and knows that its credibility is absolutely zero---it is in tatters. I tell the Associate Minister that when the Labour Party is in Government it will give real leadership in education.

Last week in the midst of great hype and drama the Minister of Education announced that there would be 800 new teachers in schools next year. Like everything else he has turned his hand to, the whole issue and the announcement do not stand up to scrutiny. It is a con of great dimension, and there will be ramifications all over the country as the reality of it sinks in. Last Friday one commentator said: "Why has this announcement gone down like a lead balloon?". The answer is simple: until schools saw the detail, they were sceptical. Now that they see the reality of it they know they have been conned.

What is the real agenda? It is certainly not simplicity and transparency, and it has absolutely nothing to do with equity. It is about bulk funding of teachers' salaries at any cost. It is about putting pressure on small schools and rural schools as part of the push to close them. It is about advancing the Government's agenda of separating communities into winners and losers, and the losers are all in the lower socio-economic areas. Favour the rich and the devil take the poor---that is the agenda.

Yet the same schools that are losing staff are coping with hungry children, children with health problems and behaviour difficulties. I have never seen so many barefooted children in our schools as I have seen in the last 2 years. These children have running noses and ear problems and their learning is impaired, yet their teachers will be removed next year.

In order to see these staffing proposals in context one has to go back to 1991, and it is simply not a pretty picture. In the Government's 1991 review of teacher-pupil ratios, the State Services Commission and Treasury advised the Government to find a mechanism to cut $100 million to $200 million off teachers' salaries, and ever since that is what the agenda has been. The 1991 Budget took 375 teachers out of secondary schools. There have been 4 years of cuts, and a reduction of $113 million in funding of compulsory schooling.

Ministry statistics tell us there are 102 fewer primary school teachers in our schools now than there were in 1991, and 262 fewer secondary school teachers than there were in 1991. At the same time 35,810 more children are in compulsory schooling. It is no wonder class sizes have gone through the roof. The Minister's negligence has caused the system to wind down, and that is the reason for the lack of shouting about the announcement made last week. To put it simply, boards of trustees and principals do not believe him.

Let us look at what is happening. If one looks at the details, the agenda is sitting there for everyone to see. The first item is to shift staff from small schools to large schools. Why? Because it is cheaper to run a large school, and it is easier to cut its funding when the Government decides to do that. The next is to shift staff from rural schools to urban schools. That makes it so much easier to close rural schools. The next is to shift staff from poor schools to rich schools, because that divides communities and makes it easier to dominate.

Why have poor schools been sorted out? When I look at Christchurch, what do I find? Thorrington School gets 2.1 extra teachers, Beckenham School gets 2.2, Merrin School and Ilam School get 1.8, and <!--546.814-->Russley School gets 1.8. That is great, excellent, but all those schools are in affluent areas. Then I find that Waltham School loses a teacher, Phillipstown loses 2.2 teachers, Aranui gets nothing, Richmond loses 0.9, and Wainoni loses 0.2. The well-off schools in Christchurch get 9.4 teachers, and the poorer schools lose 4.1 teachers. There is no equity in this, and the agenda is very clear: the poor are being slammed.

The Minister says he will transfer $3.58 million of notional roll money from 45 poor schools and spread it through decile one schools. That will give them one-third of a teacher per school. So those schools will lose their notional roll staffing, they will lose their 1:20 staffing ratio for junior classes, and no amount of kidding will persuade them that the targeted funding for educational achievement will make up the difference, because they know that if $3.58 million is spread across all the schools that get that funding, it adds up to the grand number of 0.1 of a teacher's salary per school.

The Minister says that schools will be able to apply for money from the proposals pool. What utter nonsense! It will be available to schools with a roll below 400 that are 15 or 25 kilometres from the nearest primary or secondary school. Even then it will be contestable, and will be directed to new technological approaches to the curriculum for a limited period. It is a carrot of limited extent, a one-off grant. What is more, the Minister says that the amount to be made available is a closely guarded secret.

It is absolutely despicable that the ministry's letter to the loser schools---the poor schools---states that under the old system they were the winners because they benefited from the anomalies in it. There was no suggestion that they used that staffing well, that they did a good job with it, or that they had difficult children to deal with. They were given no compliment whatever. They were told only: "We are taking it away from you to give it to the rich."

The situation in secondary schools is very serious, and some are in grave danger of not being able to provide an adequate curriculum. The overall increase comes nowhere near what has been lost to the system. In fact, it is so bad that the number of teachers covers only the likelihood of an increase in roll. So where are the loser secondary schools? Flaxmere College, the Minister's flagship, which was set up on a political whim, loses 2.53 teachers. That translates into 63 hours of teaching, and means that that school will have to cut 15 courses next year. MacKenzie College in Fairlie loses two teachers, and it will have to cut 12 programmes. Turakina Maori Girls College loses 2.6 teachers. As the Leader of the Opposition said, that is 22 percent of its staff. It will lose 16 courses. I am not talking about isolated instances; this applies to every area and rural high school.

What are they supposed to do: combine classes or cut courses? They cannot possibly provide a range of curriculums to meet the demands young people will place on them in the future. It is absolutely and utterly preposterous for Brother Lynch to suggest that volunteer grandparents will supervise computer-assisted learning programmes in those schools to make up the difference. The very fact that that suggestion was made is evidence that the real reason behind this episode is that it is a cost-cutting exercise. I say again that it has been an absolute con. The Minister panicked and he failed to scrutinise these proposals properly. There was no adequate statistical analysis, let alone independent advice. He put in place a group of people called a ministerial reference group, the majority of whom he pays to tell him what he wants to hear. When the full force of the opprobrium of schools all around the country descends on those people they will feel mightily uncomfortable. [Interruption]

If we do need to generate 850 new teachers, where will they come from?

**Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER:** Rare and reasonable interjections are fine, but continual interjections across the House between members are not necessary.
<!--546.815-->
**Hon. ROGER McCLAY (Associate Minister of Education):** I indicate to members opposite who have spoken in the debate so far, and I will listen carefully to the rest of the speeches today, that I am going to request their Hansard because I want to send a copy to each of those people on the ministerial reference group whom the member for Yaldhurst has accused of being paid to give advice that the Minister wants to hear. Some of those people will find it very interesting the next time they meet that member to hear that she said in Parliament that those very well respected people, who are representing the whole of the education system, are saying what the Minister wants to hear because he is paying them. What garbage!

I cannot believe that we will save a helluva lot with 800 extra teachers. How much saving per extra teacher do we get? It is a great achievement that today we have the Labour Party talking about education policy for the first time this year. What it has done is to tell us that there is no doubt---and I am not being paid by the Minister to say that---

**Hon. Margaret Austin:** I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. The Minister cannot mislead the House. This is the second major education debate since Tuesday that the Opposition has---[Interruption]

**Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER:** I say to the member who is calling out that I am on my feet and he has been here long enough to know not to interject when the Speaker is standing. I say to the member who raised the point of order that she is well aware that that is not a point of order.

**Hon. ROGER McCLAY:** If there was such a debate I missed the Labour Party's contribution and so did the rest of the country. I am talking about the Labour Party's contribution to debates on education. We got about three press releases a day from the Leader of the Opposition. I say to her that she should give it back to the member for Yaldhurst, she can do it better on her own. I am also going to send a copy of the Hansard of the speech made by the Leader of the Opposition to the Parliamentary Library and ask it please to explain who it is up there, and whether that person is being paid by her to give information with respect to what requests are being made to the library for information by parties that do not fall in line with the Labour Party.

We are finding today that there is a very big difference between the Labour Party and the National Party on these education issues. Labour Party members say that they will make education a major focus, so they spout forth what the last pressure group said to them. That is what we have heard today, and it was obviously from the Post Primary Teachers Association (PPTA). The National Party does not just talk about education it actually does it. It does not say "it is too hard" or "let us just do what the PPTA wants".

I say to members opposite that education is not a matter of sniffing the wind and of having people report requests from the Parliamentary Library. We deal with the issues. We have to do it resolutely, and we have to do it meaningfully, and we have to do it in this environment in New Zealand in a visionary way. So we in Government are taking the New Zealand education system forward into the next century to meet the needs of our country, which can be met only by putting the investment that we need to into education.

Labour members have demonstrated again today that in respect of education they have been the least vocal, the least proactive, certainly the least resolute, visionary, and committed, and absolutely the least energetic of any Opposition party members ever in this Parliament. This is the first time this year they have debated education, and I am pleased they are debating it. I am sick of these wind sniffers who just want to say whatever it is they think the PPTA might want to hear.
<!--546.816-->
I use as a good example the need for vision that has been demonstrated by the consultation that took place with the ministerial reference group. Every significant education group in New Zealand, except, in my opinion, the area schools---and I think there has been an apology to them---were included in that group. They all have grappled with the issues, looked at the alternatives, and been realistic, and they have come out with some recommendations that the Government has accepted. So Labour members have continued to bash them today, then pretend to bash the Minister.

Every criticism of the findings the group makes is a criticism of staff; it is a criticism of the bulk-funded schools; it is a criticism of the principals' organisations, and it is certainly a criticism of the New Zealand Educational Institute. But they sniff the foul wind currently emanating from the PPTA and they decided to spew forth that kind of rubbish in this Parliament. While they whimper and gnaw away at these kinds of dried bones, there are many issues in respect of the very significant announcement last week that have taken them a week to digest and come to grips with.

***Hon. Dr Lockwood Smith:*** I briefed them.

**Hon. ROGER McCLAY:** Well they obviously were not listening. What has come is a more generous, consistent, fair, and simple way of staffing our schools right throughout New Zealand---State and integrated schools. The late president of the New Zealand Educational Institute also worked hard to achieve matters of this kind. I asked the New Zealand Educational Institute recently how close his findings were to these, and the institute is reasonably satisfied that whilst they are not exactly the same they meet many of the criteria that were set by its late president.

They will see, for example, $140 million---that is not much of a saving---invested in our schools in the next 3 years in the form of teachers, extra dollars for the schools, and classrooms. The student-teacher ratio will improve. We must not lose sight of the fact that two-thirds of New Zealand schools will improve in respect of their student-teacher ratios, but I guess that by the end of the day we will hear the names of the one-third where there has been no improvement or where there has been a reduction. There will be 800 extra teachers next year. That has never been done to such an extent by any Government in New Zealand in the past.

Additional resources are to be available, and I suggest that Labour members study the documents some more in the next week to see whether they can pick up the fact that there will be more resources for school management, and more resources for rural schools and for senior secondary programmes, for targeted funding for educational achievement, for Maori immersion, and for special education. Labour members need another week to understand, and I hope they get close to the Parliamentary Library and get all the information they can, read it, and understand it.

On the matter of bulk funding a very significant decision was announced last week. Remember that leaders of the party opposite decided in 1989, in their wisdom or lack of it, to make it compulsory that all New Zealand schools would be bulk funded. The decision has been made now that schools may choose every 3 years whether to be directly resourced or centrally funded. In other words, we have in place now choice not compulsion.

This proposal announced last week has been accepted by all the sector groups, bar two. It has not been accepted by the PPTA and it has not been accepted by the New Zealand Labour Party---or what is left of it.

I want to say how delighted I have been to note the progress that has been made in very recent days in respect of primary teachers' wage negotiations, leading on to an integrated teaching service, and the proposals that have been spoken of by the Government a good deal in recent days in the news <!--546.817-->media. The Government has, in my opinion as an ex-primary teacher, come a very long way to resolving the wage settlement dispute with the New Zealand Educational Institute, and has demonstrated, from the Prime Minister down, its willingness to consider the developing of an integrated teaching service and a unified pay system. But that can be achieved only if all parties will work together and the Government's long-term objectives for education can be met.

It is of interest that the Government's long-term objectives in respect of education have been accepted right across the board in the education sector. I think that if they were willing to front the issue then I certainly know that the official Opposition spokesperson on education, who has knowledge on these issues, probably does accept those long-term visions as well.

Since the strike of the primary school teachers the Prime Minister invited officials and representatives of both the primary and secondary teachers to discuss what has been loosely called pay parity, on the basis that pay parity means having an integrated pay scale of primary and secondary teachers so that teachers with the same qualifications, experience, responsibilities, and so on receive the same pay. That is tremendous progress, and it is certainly my hope that the PPTA will be able to consult its members very quickly so it can be part of this consultative progress so that we can get a lasting solution that sees all New Zealand teachers paid according to the same criteria rather than being paid according to the size of the children they teach and in which particular establishments they teach.

But I do want to say that we are delighted that Labour members have finally decided to front up on this issue that they said was going to be of utmost importance to them; it was to be one of their key strategies. Well, they have been left behind with the PPTA on the current issues, and I think we should see again a person with some particular knowledge in education, like the member for Yaldhurst, the official spokesperson. I am told there has been a change in associate spokesperson, and it is no longer, unfortunately, the member for Palmerston North.

**MARK BURTON (Tongariro):** The Government was warned in 1990-91 that it should not cut any teachers as future teacher supply was going to be a problem. I quote from the 1991 review of provisions for taxing surplus teachers: "In times when the perception of the career is under threat, and when school rolls in the primary sector are expected to rise by 14 percent over the next 10 years, Government cannot afford to reduce the supply of teachers. Once teachers are lost to the teaching service they are very difficult to draw back; difficult times lie ahead ensuring teacher supply." We have seen all the evidence we need of that. Emergency action was taken last week. The Minister kindly invited us to comment on that, and I assure him we will continue to comment on it.

The Minister wants us to talk, he said, about this new staffing formula. That is a formula in which schools lose staffing in poor areas, in many rural areas, and in smaller schools. There are loser schools, and I have to point out to this Minister at the outset that it is not as simple as saying there are X number of schools that are winner schools and X number that are loser schools. The real issue is the impact on a school by school, classroom by classroom, child by child basis. For instance, Manunui Primary School lost 0.9 of a teacher. It does not sound a lot, but 0.9 of a teacher is 22.5 percent of that school's entire staffing. It is devastated. The Minister smirks as usual.

***Hon. Dr Lockwood Smith:*** Because the member doesn't know what he's talking about.

**MARK BURTON:** Manunui Primary School has lost 0.9 of a teacher. I know exactly what I am talking about. Let us look at the report of the ministerial reference group regarding resource entitlement for school staffing. It is like the report on children at risk in education, also released recently, which we know exposed huge concerns and huge problems that have to be addressed. These two reports, I <!--546.818-->admit, have raised the profile of education---quite rightly---in the last week. Towards the closing of my 10 minutes I want to come back to look at some of the implications of the report on children at risk, but I will begin my contribution here by commenting on the so-called ministerial reference group and on some of the extravagant claims made by this Minister of Education.

There is no doubt that a number of fine people are on that so-called reference group---some good principals---but that does not necessarily make those fine people experts in the field of a nationwide formula for the staffing of schools in education. Members of the public may well be forgiven for believing that this so-called ministerial advisory group carries the undisputed view of most education sector groups. Indeed, the previous speaker, the Associate Minister of Education, gave that clear impression. In fact, these people were personally selected by the Minister of Education, who does not want to listen. It is not a balanced group. Two out of this group come from bulk-funded schools---less than 20 percent of the schools. That is totally disproportional.

This group was appointed when the chairperson of the earlier Schools Consultative Group---one Mr John Anderson, who took his job very seriously---and that group told the Minister that the imposition of bulk funding would make schools more unequal. So what did the Minister do? He did not like that advice---these people had actually done some thinking---so he put that aside, let it alone for a wee while, and it appears that, instead, the Minister appointed this ministerial reference group. I think we could perhaps more accurately describe it as a bit of a personal support group for the Minister---a New Age blokes' group, because it certainly is almost all blokes.

It is a group that, I guess, affirms this Minister, who is not used to getting much support. Its members affirm him when he is not feeling very popular---he might well go and visit them after this debate. But I ask the Minister, which members of this personal support group are the specialists, the experts? Which of them have the knowledge or the experience to evaluate core information and to figure out the huge amount of data that was put before them?

**Hon. Dr Lockwood Smith:** Is the member being serious?

**MARK BURTON:** I am being very serious, Minister.

**Hon. Dr Lockwood Smith:** The combined experience of that group is awesome.

**MARK BURTON:** Their experience in schools is one thing; that does not make them experts at the analysis and the design of a nationwide formula. I would like the Minister to tell the House what analysis was done. Who was consulted, Minister? Did these people, who one of his many associates tried to suggest represent the education sector, even consult their constituent bodies?

***Hon. Dr Lockwood Smith:*** They did indeed.

**MARK BURTON:** Did they? That will come as a surprise to many members of the organisations supposedly consulted. I will raise that with interest over the next few days, Minister. We may get back to him on that one. This is a group of people that rubber-stamps and tells this Minister what he wants to hear when he wants to hear it. They did not have time over the Christmas break, when this document was rushed through with indecent haste, to do anything other than rubber-stamp it.

I have to admit that, in the week we have had, I have tried to find something positive in here. I went to that challenge. I am known to be a positive person. I am a slow reader. I got to page 17 and I found a heading that took my fancy. It is: "Innovative approach to curriculum delivery for rural schools". I have some years of interest in, involvement with, and concern about rural education, and I thought maybe not everything is bad, surely, so I read on. "The MRG"---that is, this ministerial glee club--- <!--546.819-->"believes that schools should explore the greater use of innovative ways of enhancing curriculum delivery." Well, that sounds good. "For example, distance education and the use of information technologies might lead to improved curriculum delivery without an increase in core staffing entitlement."

What they did not say is that they will cut staffing. That is exactly what they did. We got down the track a bit, and what did we find? The tinsel soon fell off my enthusiasm for that statement because, in a radio transcript I have here, Brother Pat Lynch---and we have heard of this friend of the Minister---is described as one of the architects of this new system, and is quoted as saying that a special fund has been set up for rural schools to pay for computer courses. That seemed to match pretty well with page 17 under these innovative approaches. But Brother Pat says: "If necessary, those classes without a teacher in the room could be supervised by volunteers.", and I think he did refer to grandmothers.

I am a great fan of community involvement in schools, and I have been involved in some very early work in the introduction of technology into schools. Those two things are not a replacement for highly skilled, qualified, competent, professional, registered teachers, and that is what the reading between the lines here clearly produces. Is this an example of the sort of advice the Minister's fan club is delivering to him?

***Harry Duynhoven:*** A computer teaching workshop tech would be wonderful.

**MARK BURTON:** Indeed. We have heard a lot of numbers. This Minister is very good at numbers---800 new teachers. Well, he forgot to mention that, in the Budget of 1991---the appallingly labelled "mother of all Budgets"---we lost over 300 positions for secondary teachers. Now, he cannot understand why schools are not falling about the place with glee. It is about as good a piece of news as the $3 that his miserable mate, the Minister of Finance, gave back to beneficiaries in last year's Budget, having stolen $25 out of their pockets in 1991. It is the same miserable Budget producing the same miserable result.

I want this Minister to explain it to the good people of Tongariro High School, who lose 1.56 teachers. That does not sound like a huge amount, but 1.56 teachers is ten 4-hour a week courses. Which courses are they supposed to drop? Maybe it is School Certificate English or sixth form Maths. Maybe it is Technology---although that would be a bit difficult because the only thing they will have left if you have your way, Minister, is computer screens, and if the pupils do not have competent teachers they will not even know how to use those. Is English one of the ten courses, Minister? The Minister is big on numbers and big on boasts.

**Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER:** Before I call the next member, I say to members that during the course of debates they are supposed to address the Chair, not other members across the House.

**JOHN ROBERTSON (Papakura):** It is tough being in Opposition. It is tough being on the benches on the opposite side when the economy is going strongly, when employment growth is going strongly, and Opposition members have to try to find something to be critical of. It is tough being on the Opposition benches when matters in education are starting to head in the right direction, when the Government has got the economy running so strongly that it is able to put more resources into vote: Education, and when, after many years of work looking at the allocation of teachers through our schools, the Government---with the help of some very good people on consultative committees---has come forward with a new formula to allocate teachers more fairly.

I just want to refer to a few comments made by the member for Tongariro, and I want to defend those members who were members of the ministerial reference group and, before that, the Schools <!--546.820-->Consultative Group. I think they have done a tremendous job, and I am saddened to hear the criticism by the member for Tongariro of some of those people. On that reference group a person from my constituency has done a tremendous job. I also want to give support to Brother Pat Lynch, who also received criticism from the member for Tongariro. I do not know whether that member has met Brother Pat Lynch, a former principal of De La Salle College in south Auckland. I want to acknowledge him as a fine principal who performed very well as principal of that school. He is a person who continues to contribute with ideas in the education sector. I am pleased to join in the debate to continue the discussion surrounding education.

**Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER:** I am sorry to interrupt the honourable member, but I must bring to the attention of the Government that no Minister is present.

**JOHN ROBERTSON:** As we consider this matter, I want to touch on three points.

First, I am pleased to be involved in the debate as we look forward to the 21st century and realise that nothing is more important to New Zealand's economic strength in the years ahead and, therefore, to the standard of living of its people than its investment in human resources. We might have plentiful resources in agriculture; we might have a tremendous environment in New Zealand; we might have good relationships with other countries, but all of those things will make for nothing if we do not prepare ourselves and our children well for the decade ahead as we move into the 21st century and build up our human resources.

Secondly, I am pleased to take part in the debate because as we look at the children of our country, and as we consider the fundamental principle of egalitarianism that has been adopted by New Zealand society for many decades---in this case, the principle relating to equal access to education---it is important that we be mindful in this House of the responsibilities we have to ensure that all children in New Zealand, whatever socio-economic background they come from, are given equal access and good access to quality education.

The third reason that I am pleased to take part in this debate is that I want to encourage all those who are involved in the education sector---all those who either take from or use the resource that is vote: Education---to co-operate and to resolve issues surrounding the structure of the education sector and the way that it operates. I think that many of us in New Zealand, certainly many in my constituency, wish to see the end of the battles that exist on the industrial front. We want to see a resolution to issues with respect to the allocation of resources to children with special needs. There is a wish to see a reduction in the paperwork that principals and trustees have to fill out to report back to the ministry. We wish to see a lessening of the frustration that exists between those who are in our schools and those in the ministry itself.

In an international world in which the financial markets and the trading markets are open, and migration is relaxed, a nation's attractiveness and its standing are based upon the character of its people. Nations that invest poorly in education may save some dollars today but in the long run they will live to regret it. I have used the word "character" in a very broad sense. I use it in the sense that our education system must not only enhance a young person's personality and moral strengths but it must also give young people the skills to equip them to live productively in the modern type of world that we have.

Thus I am a proponent of having a curriculum in our schools that touches not just on the technical aspects but includes in it a very strong link into matters with respect to philosophy. I am a proponent of having the curriculum in our modern world pick up on aspects of technology. Clearly we need to strengthen the curriculum in that area in order to remain a competitive nation. Our classrooms and <!--546.821-->our curricula need to be the best in the world. I salute the Minister of Education for his efforts, particularly in the area of the school curriculum. I know that he has placed a lot of energy into that area with assistance from the ministry and assistance from those people who worked in the consultative groups to further the curriculum and get it modern and applicable to today's world.

I note that in the published document Education for the 21st Century a number of objectives have been set in terms of our standing with respect to other countries in the OECD. Objectives have been set stating: "Let's try to meet the average levels of those countries or put us near the top few.". I think that in this country---perhaps within the next decade---we should set objectives in education to become a nation that leads the world in the development of the school curriculum, and that leads the world in the application of technology in schools. We have some way to go. Members will recall that when this Government came into office there was a huge backlog of deferred maintenance in schools. That has been worked through, year by year. Now is the time for us to look at the type of classroom and the accommodation that we have in our schools and try to upgrade it to make it amongst the leading types in the world.

Can I turn back, just for a minute, to the issue of equal access to education and note that this must remain a priority. I salute the Government both for the targeted funding system that was brought in a few months ago and for the new teacher allocation system in my area. Papakura has schools that represent the whole sphere of the types of schools in a society and it has been a winner under the new system.

**CHRIS CARTER (Te Atatu):** The member for Papakura said in his opening remarks that it is tough being in Opposition when everything is going right. Some of his mates have probably experienced that, but I certainly have not, especially in the area of education, because things are not going right at all. In fact, things in education are very bad. The Associate Minister of Education said that the Labour Opposition had said that the winds of commercialisation were sweeping through schools, and he sort of dismissed that. I say to members of this House and to anyone listening that that is not true at all. The winds of commercialisation are ripping through schools like a tsunami reshaping education.

The member for Papakura said that he wanted to speak about philosophy. I also want to speak about philosophy. I want to speak about the philosophy and the culture that the Minister of Education has nurtured in education for the last 4 years. This Minister has encouraged a sort of prostitution of schools in the commercial sector. He has forced schools to engage in commercial activities---something that is alien to the whole concept of State education. How is this happening? I shall give members some very good practical examples. Almost every school in New Zealand has signed up for the Telecom sponsorship, or Clear "Friends of Schools", so that parents in their schools can get a 5 percent rebate on their toll Bill paid to the school. Almost all schools in New Zealand have had to adopt that scheme because they have little choice in their desperate attempts to raise funds.

Mr Speaker, as you leave the supermarket you may have been collecting supermarket tokens to donate to your local school. I know that the member for Wallace sent out a letter to all members asking them to send their supermarket dockets to him because the rural schools in his area were desperate for computers and there were not very many supermarkets there. Those are the sorts of desperate measures that schools are having to engage in---to toady and tout for supermarket business so they can get some computers for their schools. Last year, Aim toothpaste put out a scheme whereby parents could bring in the little dockets for the toothpaste so that schools could exchange them for books.
<!--546.822-->
Recently, two real estate agents called at one of my local primary schools, Matipo Road School in Te Atatu North, and said: "If you can get any parent to buy a house in this area we will give the school a 10 percent cut on our fee." The principal, who is committed to State education, was appalled at this but wondered whether he might have to do so because funding at his school had been capped for the last 4 years.

A letter from an advertising company arrived at schools in my electorate just recently. It asked about the location of the school's dental clinic---whether it faced the road. If it was facing the road, the company would be interested in hiring the roof, for a fairly large fee, so that it could put up advertising billboards. This is the sort of commercial prostitution that schools have been forced into. They are desperate for funds, under this Minister who has been telling the House this afternoon that schools are doing so well and he has given us 800 new teachers.

I would like to talk about that. I was just thinking about the 800 new teachers when he was talking about them before. I happened to open tonight's newspaper, the Evening Post. What did I see on page 15? I will just read it.

***Tau Henare:*** A Foodtown advertisement.

**CHRIS CARTER:** No, it is not a Foodtown advertisement. It is right next to an ACT New Zealand advertisement, actually; how very appropriate. It states: "Intermediate school manual training will end in two years, when 800 teachers"---is not that curious---"will face redeployment or job loss." This is at a time when the House has been told all week how wonderful this Minister is with his 800 extra teachers. Eight hundred manual training teachers will face redeployment or job loss. "The [Minister of Education] has accepted the recommendation of an advisory group on staffing"---one of those mysterious committees of his---"that specialist manual training positions be abolished in line with the new technology curriculum." Eight hundred teaching positions will be lost. Is that not a curious figure indeed.

Schools have been forced not only to engage in commercial activities but they have also been forced to put up their fees. These are the fees that the Minister keeps assuring the House are not compulsory because, theoretically, we do have a free education system. I recall yesterday's question time when the member for Western Hutt asked the Minister whether a primary school in her electorate was justified in charging an $800 fee. That question came from a member of the Minister's own party. Schools in my own electorate have been under tremendous pressure to try to levy fees on parents. They know of course that these fees are not compulsory, but the schools are desperate for funding and have had to come up with all sorts of little extra charges in the hope that parents will pay them. They have had to charge photocopying fees, activity fees, physical education fees, textbook repair fees, library fees, and all sorts of things in a desperate effort to raise revenue.

The principal of Tirimoana School in my electorate of Te Atatu was telling me just this morning that 4 years ago, when this Minister first came to office, the school was required to raise approximately 4 percent of its own revenue. Today, that school in Te Atatu South is forced to raise 23 percent of its spending revenue---23 percent from parents and the local community. Is that not appalling? This is at a time when we are saying what a wonderful education system we have, and the member for Papakura has said that everything is going so well. Parents, who are already paying taxes to fund their children's education, are having to increase their contributions to Tirimoana School and to every other school in this country. That is an appalling indictment of the way our education system is going.

Not only have schools had to prostitute themselves in the commercial world---so have education support services. I was talking just yesterday with some members of the visiting teachers service. They <!--546.823-->were telling me how that service now has to generate some of its own funding. It does that by third-party contracts. Employees paid by the Ministry of Education are contracted out to take leadership courses and computer courses, and they charge private companies and other Government departments fees for doing this. The people doing the courses do not receive the fees; the special education services do. Instead of being in schools and working with children, which they are employed to do, they are out there hawking themselves around the community trying to generate extra money to keep their own services going. Is that not an appalling indictment of this Minister and this Government?

I was absolutely shocked to discover the situation with visiting teachers. Not only do these poor visiting teachers have to spend part of their service time generating funds, but they have also had extra workloads put on them. For example, since this Minister became Minister of Education, the numbers of visiting teachers have fallen from 73 to 49. This is a dramatic reduction in this very critical service---the only service that liaises between the community and the school. It deals with truancy and all sorts of other issues. It has been progressively run down and forced to engage in commercial activities.

I would also like to draw attention to the fact that schools, high schools in particular, are also now being forced to scour South-east Asia, particularly, for students. Most of the high schools in the large urban centres of New Zealand could no longer function financially if they did not take large numbers of fee-paying foreign students. I have heard members laud that policy and say that it is fantastic that schools are engaged in this great revenue-building exercise for New Zealand in gathering these foreign students and what wonderful goodwill we create. I say that that is rubbish. We have a State education system; it is not a private system.

Schools have become addicted to foreign students, and that addiction is based on money. Most of the large high schools in my immediate area of west Auckland, and I know in much of the rest of Auckland, could not now survive financially without these fee-paying students. If there is a sudden and dramatic change---if foreign students decide they no longer want to come to New Zealand, if Australia undercuts the market, or whatever---then these schools will founder. They have addicted themselves to this resource. Also, philosophically, I think the whole idea of recruiting fee-paying foreign students into our schools is repellent. It is against the concept of a free education service. I urge the Minister not to encourage this practice because it is a bad and dangerous fiscal and philosophical practice for our schools.

I would like to refer again to the Minister's much lauded triumph of 800 extra teachers. It is an attractive lolly that has been thrown out to the education service and to the general public. It followed his caucus meeting up north when, as we were told by the Leader of the Opposition, the hard word was put on the Minister to shape up or he might be shipping out. We have heard already in tonight's newspaper that 800 manual teachers are to be lost.

**PETER McCARDLE (Heretaunga):** This is one of the rare occasions when I can begin by saying that I believe today's general debate is proving to be quite constructive. I believe that it is providing a clear opportunity for listeners to the House to distinguish between the education policies of the Labour Opposition and the Government.

At the beginning of this year Labour Opposition members said they would make education a priority and a key focus for attacking the Government. Today's debate has demonstrated absolutely clearly that they have no clear policy to stand and promote. They have spent their speaking slots today attacking aspects of the Government's education policy. I have no problem with Opposition members <!--546.824-->attacking the Government's education policy, but I ask them to put an alternative education policy before the population.

I begin today by demonstrating the difference between the Labour Opposition's education policy and the Government's education policy by showing four clear examples of how Labour left education in a mess and provided the opportunity for National to make sensible, strong, and clear progress in education policy. When the Labour Government left the Treasury benches in 1990, it left the nation with approximately $400 million of deferred maintenance of schools. There is no argument; that is not disputed by the Opposition. I understand that Labour left $20 million in its 1990 Budget, to address that outstanding maintenance of about $400 million. Now, 4 1/2 to 5 years later, we have reduced that deferred maintenance bill to about $150 million. That is not the total solution, but it shows that the Government has recognised the problem and has taken very serious steps to address it.

One of the other issues that Labour Opposition speakers have raised today is the issue of bulk funding. They have said this Government had an agenda simply to impose bulk funding on our schools. The irony in hearing that in this House from Labour speakers is that it was the Labour Government that brought in bulk funding. It required the National Government, by Order in Council, to delay its implementation. Members of the Labour Opposition have no credibility on the issue of bulk funding. It was their policy; they brought it in. I invite any subsequent Labour speaker in this debate to refute those facts, and to say that the Labour Government did not bring in bulk funding and that the National Government, by Order in Council, did not need to delay its implementation.

When the Labour Government left office in 1990 curriculum development was in a shambles and the funding of student tertiary places was in a shambles. Over the last 5 years the National Government has moved towards implementing a very clear education strategy. I find the best description of that strategy in the seamless education vision. It involves the integration of the different levels of our education system, beginning with parents as the first teachers. Of all the areas that need to be addressed, I believe that the most important area is the very early years of childhood. I think it is commonly agreed across the political parties that if one can identify and solve problems at an early stage, one can save a lot of cost arising in later years.

Work is being done to develop a number of pilot schemes across the country under the Parents as First Teachers scheme. It is my hope that the scheme will come in on a much wider, broader scale across the country in future years. In addition, major work is being done to develop national curriculum guidelines for the early-childhood sector. There is tremendous choice for people looking at education for their children under the age of 5 years.

Tremendous work has been done on the development of the New Zealand curriculum framework. Progress has been made on developing the National Certificate and the National Diploma. I believe that one area that has required a lot of addressing has been the ad hoc series of qualifications and courses that this country has traditionally had in terms of the later years of secondary school and post-compulsory education. People have gone on access courses and have come out with pieces of paper. People have been in apprenticeships, at universities, at polytechs, and receiving on-the-job training. The intention of our seamless education system is to integrate the learning of our young people from the first years right through to adult life. The purpose is to make more consistent and clear the skills and learning that are taken aboard by our young people right through those years, and to take away the gaps that exist between the levels and ages of young people, who go from primary school to secondary school through to post-compulsory education.
<!--546.825-->
The importance placed on education by the National Government has been very clearly spelt out this year. On a number of occasions the Prime Minister has said that as the economy grows and we are able to better fund education, we will do so. We are able to do that using money earned from a growing economy, not borrowed money, which would simply put this country into a more difficult position in future years.

Another area that I believe has probably not received as much highlighting as it deserves is the recommendations made by the employment task force. Last year this multiparty task force was set up to look at employment, and it came to a series of major conclusions. A major component of its conclusions was the need to improve areas of our education system, particularly at the post-compulsory education level. Its recommendations included that no young people should come out of our schools simply to be left on the unemployment benefit, not doing anything. I believe there can be no worse start to adult life. I believe that the goals specifically laid out in the recommendations of the employment task force include that by the end of 1988-89 no unemployed school-leaver aged under 18 or 19 years will not be involved in part-time community work or training.

That was a positive report. The Government is committed to playing its part in implementing the recommendations of that task force, and I hope the other parties see their way through the politics and play their part in implementing the recommendations of the employment task force, particularly in that area of education.

There have been some other positive developments over the last 5 years. One I am particularly impressed by is the development of the education development initiative. Education development initiatives involve the capacity of local communities and local schools to get together to address the education needs of the community. This is very much in contrast to the traditional control from the top down that we have seen in our education system over many decades. Instead of officials in Wellington being required to address all the problems that exist in the funding of education---whether early-childhood, primary, intermediate, secondary, and so forth---under the education development initiative there is the capacity for the groups concerned to get together, to work their way through the issues, and to come up with the best recommendations they possibly can. That has to be a model for the future.

In addition, I believe that the use by the Minister of consultative process---in particular, the ministerial reference group and the Todd consultative group---over the last 5 years has been very sensible, and has helped us to come to the many positive decisions that have been made, particularly in the last couple of years.

In my remaining few seconds I want to mention that I am very pleased that the Government has agreed to make some changes to the Private Schools Conditional Integration Act. That Act was written in 1975. I believe that it comes from a different era in which a number of schools were under particular financial pressure. The Private Schools Conditional Integration Act was created on the sensible basis that if all those schools collapsed, then the public system would simply be put under enormous pressure at great cost to the taxpayer.

We are now 20 years on, and in the past week the Government has agreed to make four fairly sensible, possibly relatively minor changes to that Act. They include changes to clarify the Minister's discretionary power to decline integration should he so decide and have grounds so to decide. That is not there at present. The definition of special character also will be strengthened. At the moment the Act is almost totally permissive. We will bring in some stronger definitions of special character. In addition, we will make the policy in the Private Schools Conditional Integration Act more consistent <!--546.826-->with some of the other education policy areas, such as the education development initiative and the policy for State schools that want to develop new facilities. At present they are restricted if there are vacant facilities nearby. Those changes are overdue.

**TAU HENARE (Northern Maori):** Certainly my thanks go to you, Mr Speaker, and to everybody else in the House for letting me speak in the debate today, especially considering that I have sought the call on eight or nine occasions. I was going to enter---[Interruption] With all due respect, this happens on a too-frequent---

***Trevor Rogers:*** First-termer.

**TAU HENARE:** Here we go: first-termer this, that, and the other thing. The fact of the matter is---

***Hon. Roger F H Maxwell:*** Why doesn't the member make use of the time?

**TAU HENARE:** Calm down. I do not want to remind the Speaker of the Standing Orders, but I would like to remind members of the House---

***Trevor Rogers:*** Keep it interesting, though.

**TAU HENARE:** I will keep it interesting. I was going to speak about education today. I thought I would get a reasonable chance to do that earlier, and would not have to wait nine or 10 calls to talk about that issue.

***Richard Northey:*** About half his time has been taken already.

**TAU HENARE:** That is just too bad, but there will be a smoking gun at the end of it for both the National Party and the Labour Party. Standing Order 159 states: "Speaker calls upon member to speak---When two or more members rise together the member called upon by the Speaker shall be entitled to speak." I agree totally with that but what irks me is that when members from the third party, or fourth party, or whatever---I consider my party to be the third party, the Alliance to be fourth, ROC to be fifth, and Future New Zealand to be sixth---rise to speak, they find there is some sort of list alternating between the two major parties. I call them major parties---

***Rt Hon. Mike Moore:*** Major blunders.

**TAU HENARE:** The member can call them major blunders. It always seems to happen that we get the eighth or ninth call. We are here from the beginning of the debate---

***Harry Duynhoven:*** But they've got only two members.

**TAU HENARE:** Of course, we have only two members, but we deserve---[Interruption] The member interjecting is one of the members of the great Labour Party---

***Rt Hon. David Lange:*** Thank you.

**TAU HENARE:** ---who ride in on their white horses; and I say "Thank you" to a past Prime Minister of New Zealand and past Leader of the Opposition.

***Richard Northey:*** What's the point of all of this?

**TAU HENARE:** What is the point? I had something prepared, and the member can have a look at it if he wants to.

***Rt Hon. David Lange:*** Table it.
<!--546.827-->
**TAU HENARE:** OK. I seek the leave of the House to table what I was going to say.

**DEPUTY SPEAKER:** During the first part of the member's speech I nearly interrupted because he was almost questioning the manner in which the Chair had given the call, then he moved off that and put himself in order. It would be a most unusual procedure for a member who is halfway through his speech to table what he may or may not say. I think that at the end of the speech the House may consider whether that is appropriate.

**TAU HENARE:** I will want to table this at a later date. I say to Labour members that they charge in on their great white horses, wanting our help on certain issues, on certain Bills. Our party gets inundated with letters from those members soliciting our help with private members' Bills that they want introduced. I do not have a problem with that, but when we want maybe a bit of fairness, maybe a bit of equity, maybe a real Parliament not just the two old-boy parties, they put us way back in the speaking order.

**Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER:** I say to the member again---I tried to give him a warning before---that he is almost challenging the Chair about the manner in which the minor parties get the call. I assure the member that if he has a look at the Standing Orders he will find that the Chair stays very much within them, and I also assure the member that he gets a very fair share of the call on a Wednesday.

**TAU HENARE:** As I said at the beginning of my speech I do not want to call into question the Speaker's role, and I do not believe I have, but it has been a common practice for the Senior Opposition Whip to come to us and say: "Here's a spot for you." That is the practice, and to say that is not to impugn the honour or role of the Speaker, or to bring into question the role of the Speaker. What I do question is how we and the other minor parties have been treated by the major parties---the National Government and the Labour Opposition---in terms of speaking-time.

I say to all these lovely liberal people over here who are trying to interject that I really love liberal people because they get on their white horses, charge around the country, and say they are going to do this, that, and the other thing, but they do not do it in the House. That goes for the National Party as well. The Speaker is the only tool the minor parties have to stop that nonsense from going on.

**Ian Revell:** Where's the Alliance?

**TAU HENARE:** I will have talks with the Alliance, with ROC, and with Future New Zealand, and maybe it will come to the point that when we are in the House and somebody seeks leave to do something, we will deny it, as is our right. Members can waffle on about this, that, and the other thing; about the rights of people---

***Hon. Roger F H Maxwell:*** That's being destructive.

**TAU HENARE:** Well, it is not me being destructive; it is a matter of my having to sit here and wait for a call eight or nine times. Again I say that that does not reflect on the Speaker, but it does reflect on the major Opposition party and the National Government. That is appalling. As we move down the track to the mixed-member proportional representation system we will have to stop this nonsense of the two major parties ruling everything.

***Hon. Roger F H Maxwell:*** The member wants to be here every day, then.

**TAU HENARE:** The Minister says I want to be here every day. Only 20 minutes ago the House was stopped in its tracks because there was not a Minister present, so he should not accuse me of not being here every day. The fact is that we are getting sick and tired of it. I warn those parties of that. <!--546.828-->Whether they take it on board is their problem, but if the Labour Opposition continues to do it and National continues to do it, then we will do our best to stifle their aims and objectives in this House.

I seek leave to table what I was going to say.

**Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER:** I point out to the member that he is quite entitled to seek leave for that, but he should be aware that the contents will not be recorded in Hansard. Is there any objection? There is objection.

**PAULINE GARDINER (Wellington-Karori):** I quite enjoy following the speech of the member for Northern Maori because it sort of resembles my idea of what a debate should contain rather than necessarily a whole set of prepared speeches. However, it becomes quite tedious from time to time to sit here and listen to the moans, gripes, and negativity proffered by the Opposition as an Opposition. However, I have listened because I think it is incumbent on us to try to listen for some constructive advice or criticism that could be used in future education policies. I regret to say that I have not heard any of that today. All I continue to hear is carping negativity.

In fact, as I sit here I cannot help but wonder whether it was the Labour Government that introduced the greatest vision we have seen in education in the last decade. I am talking about the Tomorrow's Schools policy. That vision of tomorrow's schools, set by the previous Government, enables us now to follow through on innovative, creative policies. It set the framework, it set the structure for the modern age; the modern educational era. I wonder what has happened to the same people in that previous Government when I listen to them today; it resembles going back to the Dark Ages. It is a negativity that I have not heard before in terms of following up on that vision.

The Labour Government set that structure and now it wants to be destructive. I can think only that there is nothing else constructive that Opposition members can say. It serves only to make me think that this Government must have it right or pretty well right. That vision of Tomorrow's Schools has been followed by this Minister and by this Government, in terms of the new curriculum development---the seamless education that we have heard about. It is far-reaching, innovative, creative, and it has now had an impact on young people coming through because it is preparing them for a future that necessarily includes far-sighted technological education.

Labour wants to stop halfway now. It does not have the intent of moving forward. It has no answers; it is just knocking. It is denying technological advances. It is having a bob each way: "We don't mind technology, sort of.", it says, "But it can't replace teachers." No one has suggested that technology will replace teachers. It is an enhancement.

Labour knocks people---people like Brother Pat Lynch, who for many years has been at the heart of education. I believe he had a great idea when he suggested that we could use some of the skills of people like our grandparents---people who are not fettered by ideology; people who have a practical point of view to offer; people who can add their skills and experiences of a lifetime to enhance that technological advance of those young people by bringing the wisdom of the elderly into the arena of the classroom. They can enhance the progress of technology probably like no other teacher can. They can add to the academic skills and professionalism that the teachers provide. But those elderly people---those grandparents suggested by Brother Pat Lynch---can add the balance.

I can say only that this Minister has probably been the most innovative and courageous, despite all odds and despite the difficulties we have seen over the past few years. He was the one who had to put up with the unbudgeted expenditure of the last Government. No wonder there were a few cuts in <!--546.829-->teacher staffing and other cuts! Commitments were made by a previous Government that were not budgeted for. Instead of that, he has been courageous in terms of new curriculum development.

In terms of technology, we are looking at new language development. The call is for languages, and I think it appropriate in te tau o te reo Maori to talk about the value of Maori language. The Minister is talking about Asian languages, and the need for New Zealanders to be bilingual---in fact, trilingual. We need to educate New Zealanders about the value of Maori language as a gateway language to those critically important Malay, Indonesian, Chinese, and Japanese languages. How do we do it when we have a shortage of teachers with those particular skills? We can do it by technology---by interactive video, which is the technology that the Labour Party wants to decry. Imagine somewhere like Ruatoria in the heart of nowhere being able to beam in by satellite to Malaysia, and for children there to learn Malay as their second language. Technology has a wealth of opportunity to offer.

We are now looking at targeting requirements. I have heard a lot from Opposition members today about teacher staff cuts. They forget to mention the increase of 800 teachers. A few teachers will go from various schools where there has been an imbalance. That imbalance can be and will be rectified and met by specific targeting. That is not unusual. We have been targeting specifically for plenty of requirements. We target for Maori language factors, for special education, for special disadvantaged low socio-economic areas, and for where English as a second language is a need. At least now those needs will be transparent, and they will be met so that anybody in any community can see where and how they are met, where and how those specific needs are arising, and where we need to focus on educational policy changes or additional funding.

That is not unusual, and I refer to special focus and special needs. I have been involved twice with one of the schools in my electorate, Wilton School, in securing special funding and special requirements. That school has adapted to the needs of the community. It has a bilingual class and also, now, it has introduced Montessori systems into the whole school community. It has three schools in one. That is the innovative, creative type of thinking that we are seeing and that the Labour Party allowed us to see through the vision of Tomorrow's Schools. It really should think twice before the criticisms it is levelling today are continued.

We have at last recognised the changes necessary in recognising the value of primary school teachers. I have been one of those who for long enough has valued their contribution and expertise, and who has maintained that they need to be paid on an equity basis what their secondary school colleagues are paid---equal work of equal value. We have to look at kindergartens now in that way. I think kindergarten teachers are abysmally underpaid, and I hope that the Government will be able over the next few years to rectify that situation, as well.

Opposition members have told us that Pat Lynch's ideas of grandparents and others are not appropriate. Yet apparently they are supportive of initiatives like the Parents as First Teachers programmes or the Home Instruction Programme for Pre-school Youngsters. If we accept that parents are suitable as teachers---indeed, as the first teachers---then maybe parents, or as grandparents eventually, may also be appropriate as the last teachers of our children.

I also had to smile to myself because at last we are seeing the brand difference. The member for Te Atatu got up and said that the commercial sector becoming involved in schools was commercial prostitution and that it was alien to our way of thinking. What a load of rubbish. Our school communities have always been involved with schools, at whatever level---whether or not it is the local dairy making a contribution. Relative to its size that is no different from Glaxo and its ability to pay and level of commitment. Glaxo obviously has a vested interest in its community.
<!--546.830-->
Schools and communities cannot be separated. The impact of whatever is happening in the community impacts on the school and vice versa. Why should the commercial sector not have a say in that school? Why should it not make a valuable contribution to that school? Why should it not have a say in the product of that school coming out to be its future employment force? I think it is entirely appropriate. The commercial sector does have a vested interest.

If Aim toothpaste has a health message and wants to make a contribution to schools then what an excellent way of getting a message through to children at the same time: "Clean your teeth." So what that it is a commercial product. It is necessary for children to clean their teeth, and if that company's sponsorship of a school makes more children clean their teeth, well and good. The member for Te Atatu also forgot to mention the very important role that that company plays in the Aim book awards.

We have unlimited commercial sector contribution to schools, and long may that difference last. I am very pleased to be associated with a Government that supports that.

**H V ROSS ROBERTSON (Papatoetoe):** Today The member for Wellington-Karori has ably demonstrated, as have other Government members, the Government's attitude to education---an ambulance at the bottom of the cliff: "Hang on a minute, mate. We will catch you if we can." Well, I say to the House that the next Labour Government will have the innovative, creative, and reform policies that education is screaming out for. In fact, that is what that member has told us we need.

This Government thought that 900 police would be its passport to the gold-plated privileges of office. But it has grown fat and it has grown lazy---just like its thinking in education. That has not been clearly enunciated and education has not been capably led by the Minister of Education. He has not been able to demonstrate or clearly enunciate the principles and practices he wishes to follow in education, and it is time that he did so.

Just as an aside---and not entirely related to education, but to leadership none the less---I ask what leadership has been shown over the Treaty of Waitangi. We of this generation are the gifted generation. Today we will be judged on what has happened over the last 155 years. Tomorrow we will be judged by what we do today. Will it be said that we got it right? And when I say "we" I am talking about the Government and the Opposition. Or will New Zealand descend into a vicious cycle of racial tensions in which people will use their own political ends and exaggerate the Government's ham-fisted arrogance as a calculated attempt to deny Maori their legitimate rights? Let me make it clear. I do not think the Government has set out deliberately to provoke Maori. It has just shown its customary cavalier and careless attitude about Maori culture.

Similarly the Minister of Education has a cost accountant's approach to education. This Government skims across the surface of the real issues with the old slogan "Let's pursue excellence." Nothing is wrong with that, but there is nothing of substance underneath. The issue of school staffing for 1996 is one such issue. We have a Prime Minister who is out of touch. We have a Minister of Education who is out of touch. They are nothing more than caretakers in a minority Government. Let us not forget that.

I ask the Minister who did the calculations for school staffing in 1996? One of the schools that is in my electorate---it is in a low-waged area---Kingsford Primary School, has a notional roll. This is what is said in the letter: "Effectively and truthfully, Kingsford school has lost, not gained, staff. It has a shifting population." The school has a unique situation and it has lost, not gained, staff.

I have another question for the Minister. What expertise did the people have who did the job evaluation, and what expertise did they have in the assessment that they did? Who set the <!--546.831-->performance criteria? How did they do it? What techniques were used? Did they involve the teaching profession in drawing up their conclusions? I understand that the results of the outcome of the studies are at odds with the teaching profession. I ask the questions sincerely and honestly because I used to do that sort of work prior to coming into this place. I was involved in performance assessment in industry. I challenge the methods and the technologies that were used to set the staffing increments for secondary and primary schools.

In south Auckland we have children who are perilously at risk. Over the years we have seen our community cluttered with graffiti. We have seen schools dealing with violence. We have seen enrolment schemes introduced because of overcrowding. We have seen suspensions. The member for Manurewa has handed me a reply to a question that he asked the Minister of Education. It states that in my electorate of Papatoetoe we have had 119 suspensions. No demographic surveys have been done in my electorate. Now we are into a numbers game with staffing.

Look at this. In the local Papatoetoe newspaper it is stated: "Papatoetoe schools deal with violence. The Special Education Service has revealed that two Papatoetoe schools are involved in programmes to cope with violence." The problem is that there is only enough funding until 1996. Then what happens? Nothing! This Government believed that 900 police was the way to go. Now the Minister is saying that 800 teachers is the way to go. It is too little, too late. This shows in sharp, distinctive, and stark relief the differences between Labour and National. It cuts right to the heart of the difference between the two parties.

It is primary intervention and prevention versus cure. The National Government has the ambulance at the bottom of the cliff. We would rather prevent those sort of things from happening, and we would rather prevent the problems that are occurring in schools throughout New Zealand. The Government talks about vision. But the party in Government has a "stick on" view of vision. Vision is an important concept. But all we get from the Government is this airy-fairy waffle and this painted-on vision that is not dyed-in.

We are seeing unprecedented ferment among the ranks. Teachers have gone on strike. We are seeing low morale. We are seeing low motivation. Job satisfaction and job enrichment are at an all-time low in the teaching profession.

***Tony Ryall:*** Socialist claptrap.

**H V ROSS ROBERTSON:** When was the last time the member for East Cape visited a primary school and had a discussion with the principal? The member should ask the principal how many applications he has from people for vacancies at the school. The number of people applying for jobs in primary school education is dropping. The reasons are low morale, low motivation, and poor job satisfaction. I say to the Minister of Education that he needs to do something about it.

We have unprecedented ferment out there. It is not only in education. The railway workers are going out on strike. The waterfront workers will be next. We have the freezing-workers. Where does it stop? It is time that this Government shared the fruits of the recovery.

Children are our future. It is all very well for the National Party to mouth on about a vision, but the vision becomes a mirage if we cannot have educated, informed, creative, bright, innovative, and enthusiastic children who love learning as a life-time vocation. These children should be ably and capably led by teachers who feel proud to teach in what should be one of the best-resourced education systems in the world. It should be but it is not.
<!--546.832-->
I want to raise a number of issues today. I realise that time is getting short. But let me say this. This Government said in the 1990 election that 900 police would be the way to go. I say to the Government it could have had about 1,800 teachers for the same thing. These teachers would have prevented many of the problems that are occurring in society today. As long as I am a member of Parliament in this House I will remind this Government of the obligation it has to education. The leadership by the Minister of Education is the same as that leadership shown in the Treaty of Waitangi negotiations. There is absolutely none.

Let me tell the Minister---he is probably not aware of this---that, in his own electorate in Auckland, the Helensville Primary School recently went to Muriwai Beach. The students were awed by the spring tide and they sat there while the waters splashed at their feet. I raise that image because many of our young people live close to our natural resources, but their minds are befuddled by some of the things said by this Government. Their minds are befuddled by the falseness of the news media and by the falseness of our times. They are also befuddled because of the stress their parents are under because of this Government.

Teachers who are underresourced are not motivated and do not give their best. We, on this side of the House, want to see teachers resourced. We want to see them motivated. We want to see them have the job satisfaction that is necessary to teach our young children of the day. They are the leaders of tomorrow. As long as I am in this House, I will look for programmes that will enrich our children.