## WHAKATANE DISTRICT COUNCIL (BAY OF PLENTY REGIONAL COUNCIL RANGITAIKI LAND DRAINAGE RATE COLLECTION VALIDATION) BILL

### Report of Internal Affairs and Local Government Committee

**TREVOR ROGERS (Acting Chairman of the Internal Affairs and Local Government Committee):** I am directed to present a report. I move, That the report of the Internal Affairs and Local Government Committee on the Whakatane District Council (Bay of Plenty Regional Council Rangitaiki Land Drainage Rate Collection Validation) Bill do lie upon the table. The Bill was introduced by the Whakatane District Council. This short Bill has only three clauses. It was introduced into the House as the Whakatane District Council (Bay of Plenty Regional Council Rangitaiki Land Drainage Rate Collection Validation) Bill. The council had already complied with the public notification procedures when it became apparent that the advertised Bill was inadequate. As a result of discussions between the Whakatane District Council, the Bay of Plenty Regional Council, and the Department of Internal Affairs, agreement was reached on an amended Bill.

Two avenues were open to the Whakatane District Council. The first was to present the original Bill to Parliament and to put forward proposed changes when the Bill came before the select committee. The second was to withdraw the Bill and to go through the advertising requirements for the amended Bill. The aim and the purpose of the legislation were the same. Namely, it was the validation of the collection of the Rangitaiki land drainage rate.

The Whakatane District Council chose the first option. The amended Bill proposes amendments to each clause of the advertised Bill. The committee consulted the Clerk of the House, who confirmed that it was in order for the committee to consider the amended Bill. The Clerk of the House ruled that the Standing Orders had been complied with and that the proposed new draft of the Bill was within the scope of the advertised Bill.

The committee believes that the amended Bill better reflects the intent of the Bill. In summary, new clause 3 of the Bill validates all rates assessments already issued to properties on the Rangitaiki land drainage area for the 1994-95 rating year. Because of the omission of the Rangitaiki land drainage rate from the rating assessments of the Whakatane District Council, the assessments had been invalid.

***Tony Ryall:*** Whose fault was it?

**TREVOR ROGERS:** I will get to that. The proposed preamble of the Bill more accurately describes the sequence of events that led up to the need for the Bill. The committee has proposed that the name of the Bill should be reduced to the Whakatane District Council (Rates Assessment Validation) Bill. The simplified long title and short title to the Bill better indicate the contents of the Bill.

We are talking about the involvement of two groups: firstly, the Whakatane District Council, and, secondly, the Bay of Plenty Regional Council. They are the players in this particular exercise. The Internal Affairs and Local Government Committee expresses some degree of concern at the regularity with which it has to put up with validation Bills coming from local government. It is unacceptable, more particularly because so many are having to be done on a regular basis. It is a cop-out for local government to do this.

I think the blame for this whole exercise could be sheeted home directly to the Bay of Plenty Regional Council. Council members decided that they would change their rating system and did so before they had done their homework. They changed the rating system without the database being available to the council. A decision was made in 1991 that the council rates for 1994 would be subject to a special order and that the council would levy and collect its rates in four instalments with an interval of three calendar months apart.

In fact, since the rates were not valid, the first instalment was not made therefore it invalidated the rest. This is ridiculous. In this case the regional council could have been a little less dogmatic and could have delayed the setting up of this new rating system for 1 year; instead it insisted on going ahead. It had not completed its documentation. It did not have its database, and as a consequence it created a shambles that this House has had to fix. This is unacceptable and I hope that it is the last time that we have this situation from the Bay of Plenty Regional Council.

Too much, too quick, in too much of a hurry and with no thought is what we are getting from some of the local councils. It is about time that we put that message well and truly home to those organisations. Apart from that, this Bill has now tidied up the exercise and I do hope that we do not see anything of the Whakatane District Council---

***Tony Ryall:*** It's not its fault.

**TREVOR ROGERS:** I agree---or of the Bay of Plenty Regional Council before the committee again.

**RICHARD NORTHEY (Onehunga):** I am disappointed that the chairman of the committee did not fulfil the undertaking that he gave to me this morning when he said he would let me know whether this Bill was being reported back today. If he had done that, it would have enabled members of the committee to speak on this Bill.

Some of the important matters have been dealt with by him. Fault also lies with the Whakatane District Council, who could have, seeing that the regional council had not got its affairs in order, issued an assessed rate based on the previous year and asked the council to leave it for a further year until it had sorted out the cadastral measures and the problems with determining the areas covered by cross leases.

The other thing I am disappointed about is that the committee "wimped out" on the short title of the Bill, as it would have otherwise got into the Guinness Book of Records. The short title would have more accurately been the "Whakatane District Council (Bay of Plenty Regional Council Rangitaiki Land Drainage Area Rate Collection and Rates Assessment Validation) Bill". The whole matter is the fault of the member for Eastern Bay of Plenty, who cannot spell Opotiki.

**TONY RYALL (Eastern Bay of Plenty):** At least I can pronounce it correctly. I want to thank the members of the select committee for their deliberations on the Bill. I am disappointed that the select committee has chosen to change the name, because I do not believe that it correctly apportions the blame for this matter. This error comes from action by the Bay of Plenty Regional Council. It is the second time in the space of 1 month that this House has had to act to sort out a rating problem by that regional council.

It is wrong that the Whakatane District Council should be so lumbered with the odium of some members of this House. It was not its responsibility, and in fact the Whakatane District Council was quite clear in its advice to the Bay of Plenty Regional Council that the regional council was hurrying this along too quickly and that it would get into trouble if it did it. The council decided not to take the advice of the district council.

There are certain activities happening in the Rotorua High Court today, and when members find out about them they will discover more about what has been happening in Rotorua. I thank members for their consideration.

Motion agreed to.