## PALMERSTON NORTH CITY COUNCIL EMPOWERING BILL

### Introduction

**STEVE MAHAREY (Palmerston North):** I move, That leave be given to introduce the Palmerston North City Council Empowering Bill. This Bill is a very simple Bill. I will take just a few minutes to explain to the House exactly what is going on here.

The Bill proposes to provide for the vesting of land upon which the existing Palmerston North library is situated to be held as an endowment, not for any particular purpose, and for certain associated land to be held by the council for a public right of way. Part of the existing library building has been constructed in the air space above and in the subsoil below a strip of land between Main Street and Church Street that provides a public right of way. If members have been to Palmerston North City they will know that the public library runs a complete block and that the library is built out, about a storey up, above a space that is used either as access to the back of shops by people who are driving cars or by people walking between Church Street and Main Street.

It is a very well-known part of Palmerston North City. Originally all the affected land was held in a single certificate of title that provided that the land was to be held by council for a public right of way. Separate certificates of title were created some time ago so that the area that is required to continue to provide a public right of way is held in one certificate of title and the balance of the land, namely its subsoil and air space, is held in another.

However, both separate titles replacing that original title remained subject to the right of way requirement. Council---and this is the important bit---now seeks removal of the right of way requirement in respect of the title for the air space and the subsoil areas. The other title will remain unchanged.
<!--546.835-->
The proposed Bill that was circulated to members will correct the situation relating to the titles for the library building. It will not, however, in any way affect the current provision of a right of way that links Main Street and Church Street. All we are doing with this Bill is cleaning up something that the council needs to have cleaned up; it will change nothing for the people of Palmerston North. It is something we need to do because legislation requires us to do it this way.

Motion agreed to.

Bill introduced and read a first time, and referred to the Internal Affairs and Local Government Committee.