## ELECTOR REGISTRATION EXTENSION BILL

### Introduction

Debate resumed from 8 March.

**RICHARD NORTHEY (Onehunga):** I appeal to the House to support this Bill and to enable the public and the select committee to consider this matter. It is a matter on which the Electoral Law Committee is divided. I do hope that members will see whether a resolution to this matter can be arrived at to enable the development of a better solution.

The Electoral Law Committee report on its inquiry on the 1993 general election stated in part: "The committee was advised by departmental officials that there was no technical or administrative impediment to having an eve of polling day closure for the roll." because "Any person who enrols after writ day is required to go through the effort of casting a special vote, that is an incentive to enrol by writ day. A record 42,077 voters who cast a special vote in 1993 were disenfranchised because they were not on the roll for the electorates in which they voted." We were advised by the officials from New Zealand Post that in their view about half of those would have, in fact, been validly enrolled and able to vote if the provision that existed for the 1990 election of allowing people to register up until the day before polling day had applied.

So as a result of the law change that was made after the 1990 election to allow voters to enrol only up to writ day---a day they are not familiar with, about a month out from the election---at least 20,000 to 21,000 people lost their vote. Of course, because the net vote of National over Labour was only 7,000 throughout the country that is of very great significance indeed, and reduces the mandate---if it has any mandate to claim---from the electoral process.

Submissions on this issue, whether they were submissions received on the Electoral Reform Bill or on the inquiry into the 1993 election, were overwhelmingly in favour of closure on the eve of polling day: "We had some very strong submissions from bodies such as the National Council of Women and the Women's Electoral Lobby about the rights of young people and of women voters to be able to enrol and cast a vote. A return to closure on the eve of polling day would be consistent with the recommendation of the Royal Commission on the Electoral System."

I have one of the best-thumbed copies of this report, which is my copy, and on page 250, on registration during the campaign---section 9.57---it states: "We recommend that the same possibility of enrolment up till the day before polling day be available for all qualified persons up to the day before polling day, using the same procedure....We believe that the basic right to vote, if qualified to do so, should be the dominant consideration in any discussion of registration....We therefore recommend that 'all qualified but unregistered voters should be able to register between writ day and the day before polling day in the manner set out in the Electoral Act'." The royal commission has said so quite clearly and has given very good reasons for it.

We have the situation in which young voters are particularly disadvantaged. They do not get the re-enrolment forms because they are not previously enrolled or because they move addresses a lot. If one looks at the electoral enrolment centre's report to us from New Zealand Post, report 6A, to the select committee, it stated that in the age group 18 to 29, only 85 percent of those people were enrolled, and, for the younger group, obviously it would be even lower. So although the total enrolment is about 92.5 percent, only 85.5 percent of the young group are enrolled, because it is more difficult for them to get the information to get the re-enrolment forms. They do not receive the re-enrolment forms in the post because they are not previously enrolled or because they have changed their address several times since the election. They are less involved in political matters and therefore are less likely to have enrolled by the time writ day comes.

The equal rights of people to participate in the political process is the crucial principle, regardless of a person's age. Second, it is crucial---particularly in the MMP environment---that there is a real mandate that everyone accepts, for Parliament and for the Government that will emerge, the maximum enrolment and the maximum right to vote.

**PAULINE GARDINER (Wellington-Karori):** We are talking in this debate about a specific day on which a requirement has to be met. There are all sorts of specific dates which we as citizens have to meet. We have spent multimillions of dollars in New Zealand on encouraging people to vote. We have to start a lot earlier than just a few months before the election. We should start at the school level in terms of educating children about their civic duty---that is, their need to register. It is a legal requirement that they must register at the age of 18. If they do not do that, we cannot continue to spoonfeed them through their existence.

However, as I have said before, we have to instil in people that there is a cut-off date. [Interruption] Would the member like to have his turn to speak right now? If I recall rightly, we have a ``7'' date by which to register our tax returns. We have specific dates for many things. People are told that they have to register at the age of 18. People are told that they have to register so that they can exercise their democratic right to vote, and that is as it should be. Why then do we have to say that it has to be the day before the election? At some stage there is a cut-off day. The member for Onehunga said that they get to hear a bit more about the election as time goes by and that might make them want to vote.

There are all sorts of similar circumstances. When legislation is before Parliament people are invited to make submissions. Those submissions have a particular cut-off date every time and yet the debate rages beyond that cut-off date. We do not always say to them that we will extend it---occasionally we do. But in terms of voting, the democratic right is not the only demand of the individual, it is equally coupled with the democratic responsibility of that person---in order to exercise his or her right to vote---to register by a certain time. Candidates standing in the election also have a democratic right to know who is potentially their voting public.

I can say from experience that in 1990 my democratic rights were infringed. I spent 12 days in the House and then I was unceremoniously booted out because of the many illegal special votes that were cast by people registered in that electorate. We engaged the services of a lawyer to investigate those particular special votes. His opinion at that time was that there were as many as 500 illegal votes. However, the democratic right of a candidate could be met only by substantial financial outlay in terms of having those potentially illegal votes identified and, therefore, any decision overturned. We have to give equal and due consideration in that respect to people standing for Parliament.

After that particular election I approached the Registrar of Electors and queried the procedures of those few weeks prior to the election because information had been brought to me by some people in my electorate, particularly people from the Filipino community, who said that they had been "encouraged" to vote. In fact, they had felt intimidated by people coming to the door, and they were "encouraged" to vote. They were not told that to be entitled to vote they not only had to be here a year but also they had to be termed permanent residents. So it was not a matter of their voting illegally intentionally, but they were led to believe that the 12-month residence requirement was all that was required.

When I approached the Registrar of Electors she said: "Yes, we're aware that both parties are doing that." I knew for a fact that my party was not. Those sorts of things happen, and as a candidate one has no recourse---prior to the election; prior to something that might change and alter the course of one's life for ever---to check that, and to determine whether those votes in that period of time have been made legally or illegally, intentionally or unintentionally. I am saying that many of those illegal votes, both in Onehunga and in my electorate, were not made on the basis of any intentional illegal purpose, but were more likely a misinterpretation, because when one looks at the enrolment form the statement on it is ambiguous. Many people believed that a 12-month residency factor was adequate when in fact it was not.

In this country we have some of the most liberal electoral laws of any equivalent country. In fact, in the United States I believe that one cannot, even as a resident, vote on a school committee. In England one is unable to pass a special vote, one is allocated a booth at which one must vote. Voters have to register 4 weeks prior to the election, and that is a fair and reasonable proposal even if we have the technology to register and account for those registrations as they come in.

For the first time in 50 years the Labour Party changed that requirement for the 1990 election. It is trying now to imply that National is doing something out of the way, something new, and something that will change the whole focus of our electoral system. That is absolutely and totally incorrect. We have worked on this process and procedure for 50 years, apart from only one election, in 1990, when Labour decided that it would serve its own purpose to try to change that electoral process. Somewhere, somehow, we must encourage people to the requirement---

***Richard Northey:*** It was recommended by New Zealand Post, and the records of the Electoral Law Committee are open to anyone.

**PAULINE GARDINER:** We already disallow hundreds and hundreds of special votes and perhaps we should today be debating the process of special voting, which disenfranchises so many more hundreds and hundreds of people in New Zealand. I think of the East Cape electorate in 1987 when I saw hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of disenfranchised votes mount up on the floor beside the desk of the returning officer. Perhaps it would be more profitable, as a Parliament, to debate how we could avoid all those disenfranchised votes in terms of getting the structure and process right when people, if they have to, cast a special vote.

I return to my original focus, and that is that we have a democratic right to vote in New Zealand. We also have the responsibility, when we exercise that democratic right, to meet the requirements set down, whether it be 1 month before, 2 months before, 2 days before, or 2 hours before. There has to be a cut-off point. Until people understand and accept the need to exercise their responsibility we will not progress very far, whether it is a day or a month before the election.

**Hon. Mrs T W M TIRIKATENE-SULLIVAN (Southern Maori):** I am very pleased to support the private member's Bill introduced by my colleague the member for New Lynn because it extends the latest day on which electors may register from writ day to the day before polling. The effect is to restore the position to that which applied before the enactment of the Electoral Act for the election of members of this House.

I want to introduce a totally different element in my argument in support of this Bill. I want to refer to the fact that in every election many thousands of Maori actually go to the trouble of finding the place where they may cast an ordinary valid vote. I am speaking of people who make that effort. In a Maori electorate that means that Maori voters would have travelled a long way, many of them would have moved from general polling booth to general polling booth---before the tangata whenua vote was introduced---looking for the booth that had the Maori electorate. After all that effort to participate in democracy we have denied thousands of Maori who had made that effort because they thought they were registered but they were not.

***John Carter:*** Why aren't they?

**Hon. Mrs T W M TIRIKATENE-SULLIVAN:** I will give one very good example of a most outstanding elder in the interjecting member's electorate who had enrolled so many times in his life that he thought he was enrolled permanently. Certainly he felt he was enrolled but his vote was disallowed.

What is democracy? Let us examine the concept of democracy. It is a concept in which the dynamics require, first, that the Government accepts the responsibility of enabling as many people who qualify according to the local law to be enabled to vote as who qualify and who are eligible to register to vote. Secondly, there is the responsibility on the person to register. For a variety of reasons some may not do that, and the time should be extended so that they may exercise their democratic right. It is incumbent on the organisers of the democracy---the Government prevailing at the time---to make it easy and to make it possible for everyone who is eligible to vote, to vote. That is the great responsibility that must be recognised by the Government of the day. It is the Government's responsibility in a dynamic democracy.

Of course there is the responsibility of the people who are qualified to register. Sometimes there are complications. Quite often it is a matter of education; quite often a matter of having forgotten; quite often it is a matter of people having thought they had voted and they had not; and quite often it is a matter---and I have had these reasons given to me from my own constituents, or would-be constituents---of their having simply forgotten but having remembered on election day and having made the effort to go.

Is it not, as I have said, actually the responsibility of Government to enable everyone qualified to vote to be able to register to vote? There are some places where one may register by casting a vote. By making the effort of casting a vote one is able to register automatically by that action. That is most reasonable. This Bill does not go so far. It does not state that anyone who is qualified to vote and who makes the effort to vote may have that vote recorded. I would go as far as that. It is a reasonable Bill. It requires that the time for registration be taken right up to the day before polling.

I have referred to the many thousands of Maori who have missed out on those grounds. Certainly, almost 5,000 people missed out at the last election because they thought they were on the Maori roll but they were not registered. Never has there been an election in the past 28 years when there have been fewer than 5,000 Maori in that category. Sometimes there have been more than 8,000 who made the effort and were told "Sorry your vote cannot be counted because you were not registered."

I want to make it clear that at the Electoral Law Committee the vote in favour of this concept was divided on party grounds. Government members thought it was not a good idea. Opposition members, including another Opposition party, voted for it. Clearly it would have disadvantaged the Government. If this law had prevailed at the last election Labour would have become the Government. That is a simple fact based on the numbers who were disenfranchised because they were not registered, and who would have voted and registered, no doubt, had more time been allowed.

I can see the argument that a date is set by which it is ideal for everyone to register, but the argument in favour of having a notional date does not discount the fact that democracy in action should really facilitate the capacity of qualified citizens to cast a valid vote. That has been said by former leaders of the National Party. The late Hon Sir John Marshall made that point eloquently in an earlier debate in this House. Sitting suspended from 5.30 p.m. to 7.30 p.m.

**NICK SMITH (Tasman):** It is a pleasure to rise to speak to the Bill. I want to cover, in debating this Bill, four key areas. The first area is the important principles that are at stake in terms of this Bill and the timing of enrolment. The second thing is in terms of the practical issues of running an enrolment system: how we can practically make it work and make it reliable. The third thing I want to deal with in terms of this Bill is international comparison: what takes place in other Western democracies with which we would want to be compared. Lastly, I want to make some comment on the historical comparisons.

Firstly, can I deal with the issues of principles. While during this debate we have heard much from the Opposition about the issue of rights, we have heard very little about the issue of responsibilities. With every right goes a responsibility. The right to be able to vote is a critically important right that nobody on this side of the House would want to deny any New Zealander. But with that right goes a responsibility. I do not think it is too much to ask for average New Zealanders to be required simply to inform the enrolment centre of where they are living and their name. In fact, the law actually requires it, and any person who does not do that is actually breaking the law. So I say that what differentiates members on the Opposition side from members on the Government side is the important principle that with a right goes a responsibility.

The second important principle I want to develop in terms of this Bill is that there is a critical factor in that electors have the right to know the names of candidates at least 1 month prior to the election date. How can electors make a reasonable decision about the candidates for whom they are going to vote if they do not know the candidates' names? We do not say that nominations for the candidates close at 4 p.m. the day before the election. That would not be reasonable. But equally so, it is reasonable for candidates to know the names of the electors who are actually going to be part of that debate for at least 1 month beforehand. So if it is good enough for the electors to know the names of the candidate at least 1 month in advance of an election, so, too, it should be the right of the candidate to know the names of the electors 1 month prior to the date of an election.

Now I want to come to the third important issue of principle: the issue of the actual enrolment process, and ensuring the integrity of it. We have to accept in this House that we have one of the most lax enrolment systems of any country in the world. All one has to do is fill in a form and send it. There are no checks. One does not have to provide a birth certificate. One does not have to provide a passport or any identification that one is a New Zealander. One does not have to provide any proof that one is a resident. It is simply taken as form. If members opposite were to check the enrolment requirements in other democracies they would find they are far more rigorous. The only check there is on a valid enrolment is the fact that any person can challenge an enrolment, and we saw the topsy-turvy in the debate about Onehunga in that regard.

I ask members opposite to deal with this issue. If a person wrongly enrols at 3.59 p.m. the day before an election, there is not time for anybody to challenge that before the election the next day. If an objection is then filed on the Monday to a particular elector's enrolment it has absolutely no effect on that person's vote being counted. The law states that that challenge to that elector's right takes effect only from the date on which it is registered---that is, after the election. It makes a nonsense of that process. That is what I am saying. That is the only check we have in terms of enrolments being valid. I think it is perfectly reasonable for those names to be published for at least 1 month so that any valid challenge can be made.

I turn to the second area of the practical implications of an enrolment date. When one sat on the Electoral Law Committee and saw what happened when the date was changed, all that does is change the rush time. All that happens is that if the close-off date is a month beforehand, there is a big rush in the few days before that. If the close-off date is 2 weeks out, there is a big rush just at that last moment, and if it is at 4 p.m. on the Friday prior to the election there will be a big rush then.

Look, is it not sensible that we have the enrolment date early on in the process? I have heard some people say: ``What about 18-year-olds who just turn eligible to vote in the 2 weeks prior to the election? Do they get locked out of the democratic process?''. The answer is that they do not.

***John Carter:*** No, they don't.

**NICK SMITH:** As the member for Far North says quite correctly, the law makes specific provision for that person.
Let me deal with another issue, raised by the member for Southern Maori, which was equally an incorrect red herring. One gets the enrolment form that comes in and advises one, then one is to send it back in. If one forgets to do so our current law is very sympathetic. What it says is that one's vote is still eligible even though one may be on the hidden roll---that is, if one was on a roll at the prior election one's vote is still counted. In terms of the whole issue of the publicity campaign, I think we in New Zealand actually do a pretty good job of promotion. We work very hard to try to get all New Zealanders on to the electoral roll.

***Dianne Yates:*** It was appalling on MMP.

**NICK SMITH:** I have to say that the publicity in terms of getting people in New Zealand on to the roll is pretty good. I suggest to the member for Hamilton West that it would be mad, absolute nonsense, in the last week before a general election to have the Electoral Reform Office---at the same time as all the argy-bargy of an election campaign at its most intense; all that publicity associated with the election---asking people to enrol. It is a perfectly sensible and practical system to say that 1 month prior to the election people are required to be enrolled. Then in that last week we can indeed focus the publicity of the campaign on the issues of the election.

I said also that I want to deal with the issue of international comparison. Is New Zealand widely out of step with other countries in having a 1-month cut-off enrolment point? The answer is no, not at all. Again, we tend to be at the relaxed end. If we look at Australia we find that it has a 1-month enrolment period. If we look at Canada we find it has a 1-month enrolment period. If we look at the United Kingdom we find it even stretches it out to 12 months that one has to be enrolled.

Finally, I want to deal with the issue of historical comparison. This is where it really exposes the Labour Party to the political tricks it tried to pull in 1990. It was in such a mess, so deep on the ropes, so had it, that the only thing it could dream up to try to save itself was fiddling around with the enrolment dates. Anybody who has a look at the 1990 election results---

***Mark Burton:** *What was New Zealand Post's recommendation?

**NICK SMITH:** I say to the member for Tongariro that if he thinks fiddling around with the electoral enrolment dates will save his skin, look what happened to his mates in the 1990 election. It did not save one of them. With every single general election that this country has had, way back into the 1800s, there has been only one exception in which the enrolment date was moved to the day before, and it was a shemozzle. It is absolutely sensible to say: "Enrolment date one month out."

I return to that most important point I made at the beginning of my speech, which was that with every right goes a responsibility. The right to be able to vote and participate in an election is a fundamental right that all New Zealanders have an entitlement to. But, equally, there is a responsibility. It is not too much to ask that New Zealanders enrol 1 month prior to the election day. It makes the election process smoother. It makes practical sense, and, as I said earlier, with that right goes the responsibility, and it should stay that way.

**PETE HODGSON (Dunedin North):** I congratulate the Government on its ability to put up what so far looks to be a full slate of speakers---1 hour of them---to defend the indefensible. We have a situation in which this Government, which could have decided to let this legislation just slop around and vote it in for introduction, has decided instead to gird its loins, and to dredge the bottom of the basket of logic to try to find something resembling a series of arguments to oppose this legislation, which is not only logical but has real merit in the sense that it is the implementation of nothing other than the royal commission of inquiry on the subject. So let us now canvass some real history. Yes it is true, as the member for Tasman would have us believe, that there is only one election in New Zealand's history---

***Nick Smith:*** That's right. Who changed the law?

**PETE HODGSON:** I am sorry---I wonder whether the member would care to give me the silence and courtesy that I gave him throughout his speech.

***Government Members:*** Oh!

**PETE HODGSON:** OK, all right, if Government members want to have a shouting match we will do it that way. That is fine. I will tell members what happened in 1986. The Labour Government set up a royal commission and it came up with some ideas, one of which was that we ought to move towards MMP. The member for Tasman was one of the few in the brat pack across the way who said they were in favour of MMP but when it comes to one of the other recommendations of the royal commission, is the brave little man from Tasman on side? No, sir! The brave member for Tasman is happy to go out for MMP because it suits him, but when it comes to the enrolment prospects---the changes that were suggested by the royal commission---he wants no change at all.

Now, let us have some real history. There has been only one election when that was put in place---in 1990---and the reason that it was put in place was that a royal commission looked at it and said: ``There is now no reason it should not be.'' It is true that in the 19th century the rolls were closed a month before time, because then what happened was that diligent public servants got out their quills, took the enrolment cards, and drew up something resembling a roll, which they then crossed off on election day. That happened through into the 20th century, and they needed a month to do so.

What has happened since is simply this---computers have been invented and we do not need to close the roll a month early. That is why in some parts of the world they do not close the roll a month early, nor even a day early. In some states in America they close it as people vote. They enrol and then they vote. It is because we have the technology. There is no particular reason that New Zealand should not close its roll on the day of voting, and there is no particular reason that a voter cannot enrol and then vote---none whatever.

There is no impediment to closing the roll late---to closing the roll the day before an election. There is no impediment, said the royal commission. There is no impediment, said New Zealand Post. There is no impediment, said the justice system. There is no impediment, said the enrolment control centre.

***John Carter:*** Yes there is: Parliament!

**PETE HODGSON:** They said there was no impediment, and the member for Far North would not know as much as they would know about the issues of managing an enrolment system. There is no impediment, and still the Tories do it because, if they can find a way to disenfranchise 20,000 people---the vast bulk of whom will not vote for them---they will do it, and they will spend an hour with their obfuscation to ensure that they get this Bill dropped. Well, I call that theft. I say it is burgling the election. How many votes did the National Party win the last election by, does anybody know? It was 7,000 votes. How many people were disenfranchised by the early closure of the rolls, according to official estimates? It was 20,000 people. Labour might have won that election by 13,000 at a maximum. National burgled the election.

That is shameless, absolutely shameless, and that is why they have put a full slate up against the Opposition to what is, in my view, an excellent bit of legislation, promulgated by my colleague the member for New Lynn. It is because they know their own butts rode on it. That is why they opposed it. That is why the member for Eden opposed it from a marginal seat. That is why the marginal-seat member for Wellington-Karori was on her high horse just before tea. That is why the member for Tasman, who is finished anyway, was on his high horse straight after tea. They have no shame. Their superannuation depends on it and they will disenfranchise New Zealanders to ensure that they do not have to put up with being chucked out of Parliament, and the 1993 result is an exact example. It is an absolute outrage.

***Mr Max Bradford:*** I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. I let the member go on for a moment or two because I wanted to hear him withdraw the outrageous allegation that he made to the effect that the National Party burgled the election. That member is accusing the members on this side of the House of criminal activity, because that is what burglary is. Surely that is not acceptable parliamentary language.

**Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER:** That term has been used in the House previously as regards a political party. If a member made that comment with reference to a member or a Government it is clearly out of order. But in the way it was used it was in order. If members want to use that sort of language it is up to them.

**PETE HODGSON:** So let us get it said again: the National Party burgled the 1993 election. It stole it.

***Nick Smith:*** Sore loser.

**PETE HODGSON:** Yes, I am a sore loser. I do not like that. I do not think that one should allow 20,000 New Zealanders to have their most fundamental franchise whipped away from them on the basis of the need of members to have their salaries paid.

***Mr Max Bradford:*** Why didn't the member challenge it at the time?

**PETE HODGSON:** Can I say to the member for Tarawera, I did. The member for New Lynn did, the Labour Party did, and a large number of the public did, including every person who came to the select committee to talk about the 1993 general election and the inquiry into it. Every single person who came before the select committee, without fail, said that early closure of the rolls is wrong. The National Council of Women said that early closure of the rolls is wrong.

***Pauline Gardiner:*** It's not early closure.

**PETE HODGSON:** Can the member for Wellington-Karori stand there and say that it is not an early closure? It certainly is an early closure. It is not needed. We do not need to have a closure a month early. A day early is quite sufficient, therefore to close it a month early is to close it early, ipso facto. If one wants to close it 12 months early that is earlier still. Both are early. There is no need to close the roll early. Government members have done so because their hide was on the line, because they liked the whiff of the ministerial leather, and because they were prepared to disenfranchise 20,000 New Zealanders including all the students who woke up on the morning of writ day, only to discover that the rolls had closed and they were still in the middle of their final exams. The House should take that as an example. Members opposite say one has a right and a responsibility. The member for Tasman says that with every right goes a responsibility.

***Nick Smith:*** Absolutely.

**PETE HODGSON:** I say to the member for Tasman that if he has a right to be in this place he has a responsibility to ensure that the people in his electorate have a reasonable chance to vote. That is what I say about rights and responsibilities, and I think that that sort of unctuous obfuscation about rights and responsibilities is simply trite. There is no good reason for the rolls to close early, and yet the Government is going to persist in doing that.

***Pauline Gardiner:*** It costs $150,000 to check on who is voting illegally in those last days.

**PETE HODGSON:** I have two things to say in response to that. First of all, if the roll closes late instead of early the cost is not reduced one iota, and, secondly, when they check they find, by international standards---because that is what the member for Tasman is so keen on---that virtually no person in New Zealand cheats.

***Government Members:*** Ha, ha!

**PETE HODGSON:** All right. OK. We have a bunch of guffawing hooligans over that side who have decided to have a bit of a---

**Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER:** Before I hear the point of order could members please settle down. There is too much noise.

***Hon. Annette King:*** I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. The Minister of Tourism made an unparliamentary remark about the party to which I belong and I take exception.

**Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER:** Can I---[Interruption]---The member will be leaving the Chamber if he interjects again when I am on my feet. It is the last warning I give. When the Speaker is standing, members will be quiet. Can I say to the honourable member who raised the point of order that the context in which it was made was no different to the context in which an earlier point of order was made by the member for Tarawera. It referred to a party, not to the Government or to a member. That was the ruling I gave and that is why I let those remarks continue in that vein. There is no difference in the context.

***Hon. Annette King:*** I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. If a member takes exception to something that was said that was unparliamentary it was my understanding that the Speaker could ask for that not to happen any more.

**Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER:** Members cannot take exception to something because they do not like it, and prevent it from being debated. Providing it is within the context of the debate and the Standing Orders it is in order. What normally happens when exception is taken to something is that it is outside of the Standing Orders, it is unparliamentary, the Chair has missed it, and then, of course, the Chair has to intervene. Just because a member takes exception to something, of itself, if it is in order there is not too much that can be done about it.

**PETE HODGSON:** Let us remind ourselves that National Government members guffawed loudly in unison in a very unsubtle way when I said that the level of cheating in the New Zealand democracy is slight. Let me underline that by reminding those members why we have an electoral roll. There is one fundamental reason for an electoral roll and that is to stop dual voting or, indeed, triple or quadruple voting.

***Warren Kyd:*** To stop cheating.

**PETE HODGSON:** "To stop cheating", says the member from I do not know where. I have not seen that member get up in the House this year or last year and the sooner he leaves the better. But I would like to say that the level of dual voting in New Zealand is extremely low by international standards.

***Hon. John Banks:*** Huh!

**PETE HODGSON:** The Minister of Tourism has guffawed yet again. That is because he has limited intelligence. Let me say it a third time: there is very limited dual voting in New Zealand. In essence we are an honest nation. Those few dual votes that do occur usually are the result of genuine mistakes, and the few that are not go to court. There are very few court cases---indeed, less than two or three per election. It is very limited. That is the level of so-called cheating in New Zealand. To say that we have a major problem with closing the rolls late instead of early is simply to put up straw-type, paper-tiger arguments in face of a desire to disenfranchise 20,000 New Zealanders, because these people want their seats back time and again, because they think they are born to rule, because they like the smell of ministerial leather, and because they have no right to be on that side of the House at this time. They got there because they stole the election. They ought not to have stolen the election. The member for New Lynn has given them a chance to redress. It seems that they have decided to decline.

**Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER:** Before I call the next member can I say to honourable members that I think it is most important that they consider the language they use during the course of the debate. I personally am very uncomfortable with the word ``cheat'' and other language the previous point of order was made on. While it has been ruled within the context of the debate, it does nothing for the standard of the House and it does nothing for individual members to reflect that political parties are cheats or anything else like that when there are members in the House who are members of the political party. I hope that members will desist. I will consider whether to ask them to withdraw in future.

**Hon. JOHN BANKS (Minister of Tourism):** I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. You will recall three electoral petitions---Hunua, Taupo, and Wairarapa---in which there was cheating.

**Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER:** The Minister raising the point of order interjected and trifled with the Chair previously. He is trifling with the Chair again. I give him one final warning not to try the Chair on any more. I am well aware of what has gone on in the past. In my view that has nothing to do with the decorum of the House tonight.

**Hon. ROGER McCLAY (Minister of Youth Affairs):** I am really quite amazed at the speeches we have just heard from the Labour Opposition. It seems to me that the members opposite will stop at nothing to ensure that they get the votes of, for example, lawbreakers. They say: ``Give the prisoners the vote---fine''. I cannot help but recall Reg Boorman and the fact that he, a past Labour member of Parliament, was caught cheating. It was proved. He was put on a list, convicted of cheating, then the Labour Opposition sought to introduce a private member's Bill to change the law in order to pretend that he did not cheat.

That is the sort of thing that the members opposite did in the last Parliament. If they really had conviction about these issues, when they became the Government in 1984 they would have changed the law for 1987. What happened? They did not bother. They had old Sir Roger with them then. The votes were coming in; they did not need to ensure that the little girl in Taupo, who voted in her dead grandmother's name in 1981, could vote again. That was cheating and it was proved in court.

Let us not accuse each other in this House; let us go to the court cases. If we want to know whether someone has broken the law in respect to elections in New Zealand, the only way we can establish the facts is to go to court. We went to court in relation to Hunua in 1978. There was cheating up hill and down dale all over the electorate.

***John Carter:*** Who did?

**Hon. ROGER McCLAY:** The Labour Party did. We went to court in 1981 when the then Labour Party member, Mr Jack Ridley, who has since left that mob and joined the National Party, decided that it could not be possible that the National Party could win in Taupo in 1981, so we went to court. I increased my majority because we caught more Labour Party people cheating.

A dear old lady had died and was lying coldly in her grave---and she voted. We uncovered that but we did not uncover her! We uncovered the fact that one of the Labour Party members voted in her name. That is not allowed. A cheating Labour Party! I do not like cheats, and I do not like them when they try to get rid of me out of this Parliament by that method.

When we consider these hoary old rubbishy, nonsense, cheating-type pieces of legislation---

**Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER:** [Interruption] I am on my feet. I have not recognised the two members who are yelling at me. I have given warnings to all members of the House that when I stand they will be quiet. Would members resume their seats.

***Richard Northey:*** I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. I find the tenor of this speech so grossly offensive that I feel like crossing the floor and punching the Minister in the nose---and I am the most peaceful person here! I request that he hauls himself in and speaks on the issues. There are important issues here.

**Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER:** I said a few moments ago that I was extremely uncomfortable with the accusations of cheats being made across the House, when in any way they refer to members here. I think the Minister on his feet is doing that. I believe that it is unhelpful to this House and, personally, I hope he desists.

**Hon. ROGER McCLAY:** I cannot get out of my mind that I and my party have been called burglars. To me, a burglar means someone who breaks into a person's property and steals things. That is cheating. If the Opposition wants to have it the other way, that is fine---it should tone it down a bit. Why do we not go back to the matter of the court cases? That is the only way we can measure the amount of cheating---if there is cheating---and irregularities in respect of general elections in New Zealand.

***Rt Hon. Jonathan Hunt:*** I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. I am the person who promoted this Bill. It has one issue in it, and that is the issue of when the roll should be closed. There is no reference in it to any other petition before or since. I, too, have been appalled by the debate this evening and the comments that have just been made by the Minister of Youth Affairs. I think the debate should be on the issue of the Bill. I hope that that could be the argument. There is no reference in this Bill to any court case at all, nor need there be.

***John Carter:*** I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. The member for New Lynn is asking that the debate stick entirely to the matter of the Bill. However, I draw attention to the fact that many of the references that have been made by my colleague who is on his feet and by those who have spoken earlier have arisen because of people who enrolled in the last month, and who were then found by the courts to have misused their opportunity to vote. In that context, the point is being made that the courts have found that the opportunity given to people to register in that last month has been misused. That is the case that has been put forward. I suggest that that is quite within the bounds of this speech. Furthermore, it may well be that the member for New Lynn finds this speech offensive, but so too was the previous speech to Government members. I think we should make that comment.

**Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER:** I thank members for that. I think both points of order are fairly well made. Earlier on we had a point of order about the word ``burglary''. I ruled that that word was not out of order at that time in the context in which it was used, because it had been used previously in the House. From then on the House has gone even lower, if I can put it that way, in the type of language it has used from member to member. I wished then that I had stepped in and ruled out that particular word. I do not intend to allow any of that language, one member to another, because it does nothing. I do not think it is so much what is being said in the debate that is in or out of order; it is a matter of the language used across the floor of the House at different members. That is what is creating it. I say to all members that they should be decorous in the language they use, one to the other, remembering at all times that all members are honourable members. There is nothing wrong at all with a vigorous debate, but there is no need to attack individuals.

**Hon. ROGER McCLAY:** I accept that ruling. I guess that every time these particular types of measures are brought before this Parliament---usually by the Labour Party---it does give quite a number of members of this Parliament, and some ex-members, the opportunity to reflect on the circumstances in which they entered this Parliament. There are a number of colleagues sitting here this evening who have been subject to irregularities caused because of the kinds of laws we have in respect of elections.

I was trying to make the point that until an independent body, such as the courts of New Zealand, has an opportunity to examine in great detail the evidence that the various parties in disagreement bring to them, we really cannot establish what may have happened---whether there are people who had votes they were not entitled to.

Someone has mentioned dual voting tonight. That is one of the easiest things to pick up. It has happened in my electorate on a couple of occasions. I cannot imagine that the people who dual voted were supporting me. Perhaps they were. I do not know. Sometimes it seems that alcohol interferes with their senses and they forget they have voted or they think it would be funny to vote again, not having a clue that dual voting is one of the easiest things to be picked up.

***Trevor Mallard:*** They have been out to lunch with the Minister.

**Hon. ROGER McCLAY:** The member opposite is going to cop a bit back in a minute, like the other member was getting from me, and he will not like it. I do not know what that member had for tea tonight, but it was probably more liquid than solid. That is his problem. Usually a liquid dinner, and after 7.30 p.m. he is very, very---

***Trevor Mallard:*** I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. Unlike the Minister speaking, I do not drink and come into the House.

**Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER:** That is not a point of order.

***John Carter:*** I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. The point of order raised by the member for Pencarrow was right out of order and he should be asked to withdraw and apologise for that comment.

**Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER:** I think, with the way the House has been going, that it would be better if we just settled down, started afresh, and continued from there.

**Hon. ROGER McCLAY:** In respect of some of these dual voters, I think alcohol interferes with their thinking. They forget what they did in the morning, and they go along and vote again. I might have a look at those who have dual voted on occasions in past years.

That, however, is not the issue. The reason I am suspicious of this is that I cannot accept that with all the advertising that takes place there should be a group of New Zealanders who do not realise that an election is coming up in a month or two. What more do we have to do to ensure that people go along and get their names down? How many letters do we have to send them? What is the reason that some of these people do not seem able to get on the roll? If they are not on the current roll, we refer back to previous rolls and still allow them to vote. We do all that we can.

If these people want to get a booking to go across Cook Strait they know that if they leave it until the day before they might miss out. If they can work that out, surely they can work out that if they want to vote in the election, for whomever it maybe, they should get their names and all the details recorded 1 month before the election.

I suppose it is not the biggest deal in the world, but it is worth looking at what other nations do. I think that in the United Kingdom the roll is closed more than a month before the election. Is it a year, or something? In Australia it is a month. The Australian Labor Government did not need to jack up this law to keep getting elected over there. Of course, it has a bit of leadership, it has a few policies, and it has had some successes. It does not have to rely on some groups that the Labour Party has categorised as being so dumb and stupid that we had better give them every single minute, right up to voting day, to get on the roll. If those are the people who vote for the Labour Party, well I suppose I should say ``good on them'', but I am not going to support them in this House.

I am very happy to have the people who may not be as well educated as others in society voting for me, but it is well within our jurisdiction to accept that nobody who has the right to vote is so dumb and stupid that he or she cannot get the message from the television screens, the pamphlets, the post-outs, and so on and that that person cannot get his or her name down and do what is required 1 month before the election. If for whatever reason people do not do that, we even go as far as saying there is a dormant roll and we will still look at their names. If they are on that dormant roll then they will be given the benefit of the doubt.

It is pretty hard to determine why Labour Party members would be motivated this way, given that they tried to changed the law---to rewrite it---so that one of their past colleagues was then seen as not having broken the law but as having come off the list to be a candidate and to vote again. They did not succeed. That was a disgrace, I might say.

Then, of course, it is not hard to recall the details of the various petitions, every single one of which has gone against the Labour Party because the court has determined that the Labour Party did things irregularly. It spent too much money. It is not allowed to spend too much money, but it did. I do not want to give these people a whole month more to jack up what they categorise as their dim-witted support to get on their rolls, right up to the last minute. I am not going to countenance that. Democracy is a serious business. If people are serious about politics, about democracy, and about policies, they will ensure that all the candidates can also have a look at who the voters might be.

I want to be able to meet all the past Labour supporters and tell them about the National policies. If who is on the roll is going to be kept a secret until a day before the election, I will not have a chance as a candidate to meet those people, to send them information, or to get them to come to meetings and so on. It is a two-way thing.

***H V Ross Robertson:*** It's a load of rubbish!

**Hon. ROGER McCLAY:** That is why I will not support it. I say to Opposition members that I will never support this kind of gerrymandering, jack-up type of thing, because we have only managed---

***H V Ross Robertson:*** I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. I take great exception to the language the Minister is using. It is not advantageous to this legislation at all.

**Hon. ROGER McCLAY:** I withdraw.

**Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER:** The Minister has withdrawn.

**Hon. ROGER McCLAY:** I thought I had improved so much, too. I do apologise to the member. I am simply not going to support this kind of legislation, because all it does is to open the gate wider to the people whom the Labour Party categorise as being dim-witted because they are too dopey to get on a roll just 1 month before a general election. Well, I guess it is a pretty easy deduction to make that those are the people whom Labour Party members feel are their supporters---because they would have to be pretty dim-witted to vote for that lot.

**JIM ANDERTON (Sydenham):** I must say that although I support this Bill I had not intended to speak on it. I have been listening to the debate, and I think there are one or two observations that some members, particularly on the Government side, might be interested in.

Firstly, the issue of whether people have a right to vote strikes at the heart of any democratic system. I think that concerns about the validity of those votes and so on are proper of course, and any system must be subject to challenge. I have listened to members say that the right to challenge a citizen's proper enrolment is important, and that of course is so. However, I cannot see that it is so much worse or better to challenge a citizen's right to vote after the election than it is to challenge it beforehand. Most of the real challenges to votes have come through the court system that the Minister of Youth Affairs was waxing so eloquent about. They have come after an election, in an Electoral Court challenge.

It is true that very few voters in this country are found to have used their vote improperly. There are occasions on which that happens. There is dual voting, voting for people who are not enrolled properly, voting for people who are dead, or whatever. There are occasions, but they are very few. If we take away all the rhetoric and shouting that has gone on, that is the reality.

Would we be moving in the right direction by making it harder rather than easier for people to vote? It seems to me the truth is that we would be moving in the right democratic direction if we made it easier rather than harder for people to vote. We already acknowledge that some people have to enrol in the last month before an election, right up to the day before it, if they turn 18 at that point. If people move into a new electorate, there are provisions for them to vote in the electorate in which they lived before, but why should they not vote in the new electorate where they are going to live and to have their future? Why should not someone who may have decided not to vote for principled reasons---may have said: "Well, I don't trust any of these people."---be able at the last minute to say: "No, I've listened to the issues. I would like to vote. I've made a mistake. I would now like to get on the roll."?

When one actually looks at the lists of voters whose election votes are discounted, there are tens of thousands of them. In good faith those people actually go to the polling-station on the day and vote, thinking that their vote will be counted. I tell anyone who wants to tell those people that their votes were not counted to try it. I did after my first election in Sydenham. I got a list of all the people whose votes had been cancelled because they were not enrolled properly, or whatever. They would have been perfectly entitled to vote if they had enrolled properly, because they lived in the electorate. I wrote a letter to all of them and stated: "Sorry, your vote didn't count at the last election, but here's an enrolment form. Would you please enrol and send it back." I got a whole lot of abusive calls and letters asking me what right I had to cancel their votes, and all the rest of it.

Those people had assumed that their votes had been counted. They had gone along and voted, their vote had been accepted, and they thought they had voted. But in fact their votes had not been counted at all. When they were told that, they were absolutely outraged. Their right to vote was perfectly valid. They lived in the electorate. They had lived there for a long time, but for whatever reason they were not properly enrolled---they just had not got around to it, or they were on the roll once but by some administrative error they had been cut off, and so on. All these things happen.

I say to the Government that with computerisation and all the rest of it, no one is going to tell me that we cannot get accurate rolls. If there is a challenge to a vote, it can take place after the election if that vote is the difference between a member winning or losing a seat. As the electorates get larger the chance of one or two votes actually affecting a result is very remote, to be fair. That is the reality, so why not move more in the direction of enfranchising more New Zealanders, rather than moving in the other direction? That is the first point.

The second point I want to make is about the courts of New Zealand. I say to the Minister of Youth Affairs and others who are so keen on the courts' rulings that I was once the president of a particular party when the Electoral Court disqualified votes that had been cast in an election. The court disqualified those votes on the basis that the voters had not done exactly what the legislators---us in Parliament---had intended. They had marked their ballot papers in a different way, and the court ruled that they could not do that. Those votes were disqualified and the Electoral Court upheld that ruling.

That case was taken to the Court of Appeal. The Electoral Court, which the member is so keen on, had actually upheld the disqualification of those votes, yet the Court of Appeal in a declaratory judgment---the first time this had been done, to my understanding---overruled the Electoral Court, of which the Chief Justice is chairman. The Chief Justice is the chairman of the Electoral Court, which the Minister of Youth Affairs is so keen on. The Court of Appeal by five judges' votes to nil overturned the decision that the Chief Justice as the chairman of the Electoral Court had made. That is how confident they were about the error that the Electoral Court had made.

The reality that I am pointing out to the Minister of Youth Affairs is that this Parliament is where the legislation is made. If the intention of this Parliament is to have people vote, then let us make it clear that they should be able vote as easily as is possible under reasonable legislation that safeguards the integrity of the vote. That seems to me to take enrolment right up to the day before the election. There is nothing wrong with that. We have the ability to record all of that, and if there is a subsequent challenge we can investigate. But do not tell the House that the courts of New Zealand should decide all of this. If the member really wants this issue to go to the courts, and he has said that a dozen times in here, he should find out what happens when it does go to the courts. What he will find is that the courts can make some dreadful mistakes.

***Hon. Paul East:*** Rubbish! They never overturned the decision.

**JIM ANDERTON:** I well remember when that announcement was made in this House, because I was actually here at the time. I saw the colour drain from the faces of Government members on that day, because what they had proclaimed as a shocking state of affairs---that the Labour Party had been involved, and all the rest of it---was found not to be so. The Court of Appeal by five votes to nil ruled that disqualifying those votes had not been a correct decision, and that the intention of voters to vote should be the main criteria in deciding whether votes counted. I say to the Minister of Youth Affairs that I know and remember those things about the courts. So if we want to have it all on the table, let us have it on the table.

The judges were asking whether it was the intention of the Legislature that people should vote and have their votes counted. Surely that is what democracy is about. That is what Parliament is about. If that is the intention, then let us make it as clear as we can, and let us make the law as simple and easy as we can. That does not mean that we regulate so that people can break the law or can take advantage of it, but it means that we want a fair and reasonable opportunity for all citizens of New Zealand not only to vote but to have their votes counted.

It is always distressing to me to see the number of disqualified votes in an electorate---hundreds and hundreds of them in every electorate. Most of them would not make any difference to the result, but those votes should be counted. Under a mixed-member proportional representation election it would be even more important that those votes be counted, because the votes would clearly count. It is not a matter of their being for one side or the other, as under the first-past-the-post system. Those votes would count in determining how many seats in Parliament are represented by that party. So they are very important votes.

That makes it even more important that this Parliament make it easy for people to register their votes and to have them counted. That is all that is being asked here. I do not think it is a big deal. I think it is something the Government should think long and hard about before it opposes it.

**Hon. JOHN BANKS (Minister of Tourism):** I am surprised that the right honourable member for New Lynn is sponsoring this Bill, because on this side of the House the right honourable member for New Lynn is seen as just that: a right honourable member in every sense of the word. In my 15 years in this House I have never known him to be anything but upfront, honest, and reliable. I am surprised that he would want to be part of anything to do with the Labour Party when it comes to elections, given the Labour Party's track record at elections in recent times---in particular, Hunua in 1978; more particularly, Taupo in 1981; and most recently, in 1987, the Wairarapa constituency. On three occasions senior members of the judiciary found that the Labour Party had "flat-footed". I am not going to use the word "cheated". I am not going to use it.

**Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER:** The member saying that he is not going to use a word is exactly the same as his using it. I suggest the member desists.

**Hon. JOHN BANKS:** But what I am going to use, if the Speaker understands the meaning of the word and the House understands the meaning of the word---

**Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER:** The member will withdraw that remark. It is a direct reference to the Chair.

**Hon. JOHN BANKS:** I withdraw. Do members of the House know what the word "chicanery" means? Does the Speaker know? Does the House know? Do members know? Does the Labour Party know? I will tell members what is stated in the dictionary the Clerk has lent me about the word "chicanery". Chicanery is legal trickery, deception, and sophistry. It is legal trickery. Three learned judges said that on three occasions. In Hunua in 1978 the judges used the word "chicanery"---not the other word that starts with "c;" no, they used the word chicanery, which the dictionary defines as "legal trickery".

I make it simple because Labour Party people cannot read "a month before", and if they cannot read that they certainly will not be able to read "a day before". It is interesting that Labour Party people can fill out trifecta forms with no trouble, and in the dark, but find it difficult to fill out registration forms---

***Mark Burton:*** I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. Is it necessary for the estimated 10 percent of New Zealand adults who have a serious literacy problem to suffer this abuse from a Minister of the Crown?

**Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER:** That is not a point of order.

**Hon. JOHN BANKS:** The Labour Party does not like it because on three occasions not the National Party but the courts of this land found the Labour Party as guilty as sin. In 1978 it cost the National Party $180,000 to bring the Hunua electoral petition and to oust the Labour Party member, who took his seat in this House---

***John Carter:*** For a month.

**Hon. JOHN BANKS:** Yes, for a month then we brought in the present member for Tauranga.

***Hon. Paul East:*** Was it worth it?

**Hon. JOHN BANKS:** That is a debatable question and I am sure you will agree, Mr Speaker. However, not only was the Labour Party unhappy about being caught in 1978---[Interruption]---but, I say to my friend from Waipa, hard as it is to believe it was caught again in 1981. What was it caught doing? It was chicanery, sophistry, legal trickery. They are not my words, and I am glad members have dictionaries in case they do not know what they mean. "Chicanery" is the same as the word that has been used in this House but which has been banned. The word has been banned. It has been mentioned 39 times tonight. I am not going to mention it, but I am going to mention the Labour Party's historical "flat-footedness" when it comes to elections.

I am surprised at the member for New Lynn, who is a right honourable member. If I had to rely on anybody on the other side of the House I would rely on him. I am surprised, given the Labour Party's track record of chicanery, that its members should come into this House tonight and try to foist this Bill on the people of New Zealand, for people who "cannot read 'a month before'" but "maybe can read 'a day before'".

The Labour Party comes into this House and accuses the Government. The Government says it is a privilege to vote, and with that privilege comes the responsibility within a 3-year period to get one's name on the roll. It is not for Labour Party hacks up and down the country, trade union sympathisers up and down the country, to do that. We know what happened to the present member for Wellington-Karori seat in 1990. The member for Wellington-Karori, a fine woman member of Parliament, would have been here 3 years earlier if it had not been for orchestrated chicanery.

**Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER:** I say to the Minister that when he starts accusing another party of organised chicanery we are getting back to exactly where we were earlier on. I ruled that I did not like language that meant cheating. I know the Minister has a dictionary and I have the same one here. His use of that word is just another way of saying exactly the same thing. Now that he has related that word to a party he is going back to where we were before, and I ask him to desist. Just because a word with a certain meaning is ruled out of order does not of itself mean that a similar word with the same meaning is in order.

**Hon. JOHN BANKS:** I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. I serve notice upon you that I am going to refer this matter to the Speaker for clarification---

**Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER:** The Minister has been here long enough to know that I am the Speaker for the purpose of this debate.

***Trevor Mallard:*** Even if he's had a haircut!

**Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER:** I have warned members that when I am on my feet they must not interject. If the Minister would like to have a look at Speaker's ruling 81/6, he will see that the Speaker has absolute discretion to rule out anything that in the Speaker's opinion may lead to disorder. I ruled out the word "cheating" earlier on because it was leading to disorder. I say to the Minister that he is using a similar word with the same meaning, and I am finding that word no longer acceptable.

**Hon. JOHN BANKS:** I ask this Parliament and the people of New Zealand tonight why whenever there are electoral petitions they are always orchestrated by National Party candidates, and why on every occasion the courts find against the Labour Party. Why does only the Labour Party have dead people voting for it? This is not a dead issue; it is stiff but it is not a dead issue! I am sure it is OK to say in Parliament that Labour Party people, activists, have a happy knack of convincing people to vote more than once. In the Hunua case dead people even voted twice, and in Taupo there was more "stiff" voting, because dead people voted three times and kids yet to be born voted.

The Labour Party cannot have it every way. It cannot have dead people voting. Live people vote for National because they can think; dead people vote for Labour because they cannot. That is what happened, and that is what this Bill is all about---"Give the vote back to the dead." That is what it is all about. Do not give the dead one vote; give them two or three, and if they died at an early age give them half a dozen. That is the Labour Party.

We cannot use the word starting with "c", we cannot use the word starting with "ch", but we can say that the Labour Party always has its hands in the till---

***John Carter:*** In the grave!

**Hon. JOHN BANKS:** ---and in the grave when it comes to elections. It cannot rally enough support from live people; it has to get deadheads to vote. That is Labour Party stuff, is it not? This Labour Party is so low in the polls it is in the graveyard, and that is where it can stay. There is no way that Labour members can come into this House and try to hoodwink us into accepting a little, sneaky measure that will give their mates out there on the streets the opportunity to sign up people who arrived in this country the week before, or who might even have arrived in the country after the election, and who will vote for Labour.

I remember an old Labour supporter saying to the late Arthur Faulkner---a very good member of Parliament---"Arthur, I want to stay alive long enough to vote for you." One of Arthur's flunkeys, one of his Labour Party people in Roskill---and I stood in Roskill---said: "Don't worry Fred. We'll make sure you have your vote." That is the Labour Party. I rest my case.

**Rt Hon. JONATHAN HUNT (New Lynn):** I could spend my 10 minutes in reply answering some of the points made by the Minister of Tourism. All I want to say is that it is a very, very unfortunate speech and it is bringing Radio Pacific, a talkback show, into the House of Representatives, and that is a totally unworthy thing to do. I urge members to support my Bill.

The House divided on the question, That leave be given to introduce the Elector Registration Extension Bill.

Ayes 43: Anderton, Elder, Maharey, Swain, Barker, Field, Mallard, Tennet, Blincoe, Goff, Matthewson, Tirikatene-Sullivan, Braybrooke, Henare, Moore, Tizard, Burton, Hodgson, Northey, Wetere, Carter C, Hunt, O'Connor, White, Caygill, Keall, Peters, Yates, Clark, Kelly, Pettis, Cullen, Lange, Robertson H V R, Tellers: Dunne, Lee S, Sinclair, King, Duynhoven, Mackey, Sutton, Sutherland, Dyson

Noes 45: Banks, Graham, McLauchlan, Simich, Bradford, Gray, Marshall, Smith L, Burdon, Gresham, Maxwell, Smith N, Carter D, Hilt, Meurant, Sowry, Cliffe, Kidd, Neeson, Storey, Cooper, Kyd, Neill, Upton, Creech, Laws, O'Regan, Williamson, East, Luxton, Revell, English, McCardle, Robertson J, Tellers: Fletcher, McClay, Rogers, Carter J, Gardiner, McCully, Roy, Ryall, Gerard, McKinnon, Shipley 

Majority against: 2

Motion negatived.