# ELECTION OF SPEAKER.

**The CHAIRMAN** read the 8th clause of the Constitution Act, which requires that the House at its first meeting shall proceed to elect a Speaker.

**Mr. BARTLEY** rose and said he had much pleasure in proposing for the honourable office of Speaker of that House a gentleman who was known to each and to all the members; a gentleman of high standing and station, who possessed much property in the colony, and was strongly bound to it by every tie of honour and of interest; one who was not unaccustomed to the duties of the office, and who possessed also that kindness of manner which, next to impartiality, was the highest qualification for the office, as tending to harmonize and promote proper feeling among the members; one who, in all other respects, he was sure the House would consider highly qualified for the responsible and honourable post. He had therefore much pleasure in proposing Charles Clifford, Esq., to be their Speaker, being confident that, if elected, he would fulfil the duties of the office with impartiality, grace, and dignity.

**Mr. FITZGERALD** felt that he could with much satisfaction second the motion which had just been proposed to the House. He believed that the office would be honourably and impartially filled by Mr. Clifford. In the absence of precedent to guide gentlemen in the exercise of duties to which few may have turned their attention, it would be an advantage to the House to have one in the chair who had had some experience in conducting, in another province, business of a similar character to that which would occupy the House. And, besides, he believed that the love which Mr. Clifford entertained for the institutions under which they had met would influence him in conducting the deliberations of that House so as to reflect credit on the country to which he was so strongly attached.

The motion was put from the Chair, and carried unanimously.

**Mr. GIBBON WAKEFIELD** said that, in the absence of a more ready means of communicating with the Officer Administering the Government, so as to know His Excellency's pleasure as to confirming the election which they had just made, he believed it would be proper that a deputation, consisting of the mover and seconder, and such other members as the House might think proper, should wait on His Excellency to acquaint him of the choice they had made. From what had come to his knowledge he thought the House would best consult the convenience of His Excellency by appointing the deputation, who would receive His Excellency's decision at twelve o'clock on the next day, which would not look so conspicuously inconsiderate as if it were given immediately; and afterwards, at two o'clock, His Excellency's Opening Address would be delivered.

**Dr. LEE** thought that, as the Speaker had been duly elected by the House, it became now the duty of the proposer and seconder to conduct the Speaker to the chair.

**Mr. CUTTEN** thought that, until confirmed by the Governor, as provided by the Act under which they were assembled, the election of the Speaker was not complete, and therefore it would be out of order to proceed as suggested by the honourable member who spoke last.

**Dr. MONRO** thought it desirable that as little time as possible should be lost before communicating with His Excellency, as there had occurred two vacancies in the representation of Nelson, which required to be reported to the Officer Administering the Government, but must in the first instance be reported to the Speaker after his being duly appointed. It was desirable that the writs should be issued in time to be sent down by the steamer, so that Nelson might have its full representation in that House as soon as practicable.

**Mr. GIBBON WAKEFIELD** said he made the suggestion after a chance conversation with the Attorney- General, who had stated that the course pointed out by him (Mr. Wakefield) was that which would best accord with the arrangements of His Excellency. He would regret that any delay should take place with respect to the Nelson elections, and might say that he understood the writs were quite ready to be signed as soon as the House had reported the vacancies.

**Dr. LEE** maintained that enough had been done to entitle the Speaker to take the chair, and quoted precedents taken from the proceedings of the Legislative Council of New South Wales and the House of Commons in support of his views.

**Mr. MACANDREW** and **Mr. FITZGERALD** thought that, according to the Constitution Act, Mr. Clifford could not be properly considered the Speaker of that House until his appointment had been approved by the Governor.

**Mr. MERRIMAN** concurred in this view, and observed that there was no real difficulty, inasmuch as they had a Chairman.

**Mr. CLIFFORD** said that, whatever might be the order in which the House might carry out its decision, he could no longer refrain from expressing his thanks for the very courteous manner in which he had been proposed, and for the unanimity with which the House had chosen him. He could assure the House that he felt deeply gratified in placing his services at the disposal of the House.

**Dr. LEE** reiterated the expression of his views, and declared that the Governor had no theoretical right to reject anything that had passed that House.

**Major GREENWOOD** said he was aware that His Excellency would be at his office at twelve o'clock to receive any deputation that might be appointed to wait on him.

**Mr. REVANS** could see no reason why Mr. Clifford should not take the chair, for, if he was not indeed Speaker, he was at least Speaker-elect. He would therefore move, That the present Chairman do leave the chair, and that Mr. Clifford be conducted to the chair.

The motion was carried; whereupon

**Mr. CARLETON** rose and said, -Mr. Clifford,
I have much pleasure in leaving the chair, and in congratulating you, as well as this House, on your appointment.

**{{sc|Mr. SPEAKER}}** then took the chair.

It was then proposed and agreed that Messrs. Bartley and FitzGerald should be the deputation to wait on His Excellency to inform him that the choice of the House had fallen on Mr. Clifford.

**Mr. FORSAITH** said that, if they desired to follow out the analogy of the House of Commons in their proceedings, the next step would be the appointment of a Serjeant-at-Arms.

After some remarks by several members, who considered the House not yet properly constituted, this subject was allowed to drop.

On the motion of **Mr. REVANS**, seconded by **Mr. FORSAITH**, a vote of thanks to Mr. Carleton for his manner of conducting the business as preliminary Chairman was passed unanimously.

The House then adjourned until one o'clock.

The House reassembled at one o'clock.