# PRAYERS AT OPENING.

**Mr. MACANDREW** suggested that, before the House proceeded to any further business, there should be an acknowledgment of dependence on the Divine Being, and that prayers should be made for a blessing on their labours; and if, as he understood, the feeling of the House was in favour of that course, he would, with their permission, withdraw to invite the nearest clergyman, who, he believed, was the minister of the parish, to officiate.

**Mr. REVANS** thought it had better come in the shape of a motion before the House.

**Mr. SPEAKER** remarked that, as a rule, it would be desirable, to prevent mistakes, if members would put their motions in writing and hand them to the Clerk.

**Mr. MACANDREW** had not prepared any formal motion on the subject, believing that it had only to be mentioned to be adopted by the House, and feeling assured that every rightthinking man would consider it fit and proper that the first act of the House of Representatives should be an acknowledgment of the Divine favour to this country, and of supplication for a continuance of that favour upon which their prosperity so materially depended. However, if it was the wish of the House, he had no objection to bring the subject formally before it, and would now move, That it is fit and proper that the first act of the House of Representatives shall be a public acknowledgment of the Divine Being, and a public supplication for His favour on its future labours.

The motion was seconded by **Mr. MACKAY**.

**Dr. LEE** said that the question was one which, to his mind, admitted of no discussion, and he would therefore move, That the House of Representatives be not converted into a conventicle, and that prayers be not offered up.

**Mr. REVANS** seconded the amendment.

**Mr. CARLETON** trusted that no discussion would arise on this question: such would be, indeed, irrelevant, inasmuch as he had no doubt every member had come to that House with his mind fully made up, and was therefore ready to vote either one way or the other.

**Mr. O'NEILL** felt as deeply as any other member could possibly feel his obligation to the Divine Being whose providence had brought him to this fine country; but, at the same time, he could not agree to the introduction of any particular minister of religion to offer up prayers in that House, composed, as it was, of members holding religious views so widely differing from each other. He should be very sorry to see in that chamber a minister of the Church to which he belonged engaged in a service which would be as unacceptable to them as it would be to himself if ministers of their Churches were called on to officiate. He therefore could not support the motion. The cause of religion was more likely to be retarded than furthered by the adoption of it. He thought, however, it was premature for the House to discuss the subject; it would be competent for the Officer Administering the Government to introduce his chaplain at the opening of the General Assembly, when no doubt he would do so, and prayers would be offered. Afterwards, the question should more properly come before the House as to whether it should be one of their standing rules that prayers should be used.

**Mr. FORSAITH** did not think that the House should avoid discussion of this question: it was one of great moment, and would present itself to them in various forms. He had looked forward to the introduction of the subject after the opening of the General Assembly, and was prepared to give it his support, for there was no reason why the members of the House, who were the representatives of a people acknowledging the Almighty Being, should refrain from seeking from Him who was the source of all good that aid which he trusted, as individuals, they invoked.

**Mr. MACANDREW** had no objection to allow the motion to stand over until after the opening of the Assembly, if that was the general wish of the House.

**Mr. FITZGERALD** could not understand that the opening of the General Assembly had anything to do with the question. If it were the intention to press it on the House, it might as well be decided now.

It was suggested by **a member** that Mr. Macandrew might postpone the further consideration of his motion until after the opening of the General Assembly, as the withdrawal of it now with that understanding would only be a withdrawal on form, not on principle.

**Mr. MACANDREW** said that, to his mind, whatever course should be taken with regard to this subject at the opening of the General Assembly, it was clear to him that the House of Representatives, being the first embodiment of a New Zealand nationality, should be consecrated ; and with this view he had called the attention of the House to the subject before proceeding to any business.

**Mr. FITZGERALD** was not willing to give a silent vote on this occasion, lest he might be misunderstood. He did not think the amendment was one that ought to have been proposed in its present form to the House, as it was not worded in language, to say the least, of courtesy or respect; but, at the same time, he must withhold his support from the original motion, because it seemed to involve the question of a State religion, the very appearance of which ought to be avoided by that House. He did not wish that his opposition to the motion should be misunderstood. He had been one of those who, in the province to which he belonged, had spared no pains to provide for the due observance of religious ordinances according to those forms which he believed to be right; but in doing so it was with no wish to establish a State Church, but one that should be maintained by the voluntary support of those who enjoyed its privileges. The Constitution had raised no hindrance to colonists of the Hebrew faith or Unitarians sitting as members of that House; and surely, if Jews and Unitarians were the majority of its members, and the nearest Church of England clergyman were to be brought in to perform divine service, the service would be but a monstrous mockery; and, again, if conducted according to their views, he himself, and no doubt other members, would feel obliged to leave the room. It might be easy to open up the door to admit difficulties, but not so easy to shut them out; the best way was to get rid of the practice altogether as absurd. At Canterbury, at the opening of the Provincial Council, he had suggested what he believed to be the proper way to avoid the difficulty that members of the Church of England should attend at a service in the parish church before the opening of the Council; and such was the mode they adopted to seek the Divine blessing-a course which he believed to be the most rational one for each to take in his own way, rather than attempt to call upon all to agree to any one mode or form for the occasion.

**Mr. GLEDHILL** could not agree to the amendment as it stood, which might convey the impression that there was some great attempt made in the House to establish conventicles. At the same time, he thought the House should keep to its own business, for, if there was not a full appearance of a State-Church tendency in the movement, there was certainly an approach to it: he thought it better, therefore, to steer clear of it altogether, and let the House at once turn its attention to its legitimate duties.

**Dr. MONRO** could not see any occasion to fear the setting-up of one Church above another by the House agreeing to invoke the Divine aid at the commencement of its duties. For his own part, he was willing to join in the prayers of any Church offered up for such an object.

**Mr. GIBBON WAKEFIELD** said the dread entertained by some members of a State Church being set up if the House engaged in prayer was, he thought, entirely unnecessary, for in countries where State religion is absolutely repudiated the invariable practice is to open the Legislative Houses by prayer. He was quite sure, with respect to America, that in both Houses of Congress prayer was used, sometimes by a minister of one denomination and sometimes by another.

After some further remarks from members on both sides, at the suggestion of several members, **Dr. LEE** withdrew his amendment; when

**Mr. WELD** thought the discussion was likely to be fruitlessly prolonged without any definite result; and, to bring the question to an issue, he would, now that the former amendment had been withdrawn, beg to submit the followdue ing: That this House, whilst fully recognizing the importance of religious observances, will not commit itself to any act which may tend to subvert that perfect religious equality that is recognized by our Constitution, and therefore cannot consistently open this House with public prayer. The only remark he thought it desirable to make was that he objected to the introduction of any practice into that House by which religious equality was not recognized. Hebrew gentlemen might be elected, and therefore it would be impossible to frame a form of prayer suitable to them and to Christians also, without involving the House in debate on abstruse religious points which were not fitting themes for discussion in that House, and not calculated to encourage sincere religious conviction.

**The Hon. J. STUART-WORTLEY** seconded the amendment, because he thought the course proposed by the motion must of necessity lead to a State-Church discussion, and to all the unpleasantness of the factious opposition which is usually given to it. They should avoid the insertion of the wedge, lest they might be unable to draw it out again.

**Mr. CUTTEN** could not see any connection between the opening of that House by prayer and the establishment of a State Church.

**Mr. REVANS** could hardly take as a fact what had been stated by the honourable member for the Hutt with respect to the practice in America. At any rate, if it were as he described, it surely was an evidence of great religious laxity when they admitted ministers of all creeds to officiate, turn and turn about. He thought the motion would lead the House away in a retrograde direction from the free spirit of the Constitution, which appeared to have been framed so as that the colonists of New Zealand at any rate should be exempt from the causes of heartburning on religious questions which, being interwoven in the old institutions at Home, could not be so readily got rid of. No man had a right to prescribe to him in what manner he should worship his God; for what was no matter of doubt as between man and his Maker was too often the source of much discord as between man and man; and, as no man could assist or prevent his fellow-man in his relation to God, then none should seek to prescribe to him the manner of worshipping that Being. There could be no doubt that by the adoption of the motion the House must attach some form of religion or another to the State; and then the question must arise by-and-by, What form is it to be?

**Mr. FORSAITH** was sorry to find that in this discussion there was a disposition to confound things which had no affinity whatever. The question lay at the very root of religion itself, and was not merely one of the form or mode of carrying it out. He could not understand that, if the House determined to open its proceedings with prayer, therefore it had declared in favour of a State Church. This he would as firmly oppose as any man; but he could not oppose what he believed to belong to the very groundwork of our common faith. He was not aware that there were any Jews in that House; but, even if there were, he was sure they would not object to offer up prayer and supplication to Jehovah. When the Jew assembled in his synagogue, he was accustomed to read out of his Scriptures, "In all thy ways acknowledge Him, and He will direct thy paths;" and according to this injunction did not refrain from seeking that direction. There could be no objection to the members of that House, in their collective capacity, having recourse to that which he trusted in their individual capacity they observed; but especially was it incumbent on them, who had been made the honoured instruments of introducing a new and liberal system of government into this great country, to acknowledge their dependence on the Divine wisdom, and to seek the guidance and assistance of the Supreme Being. He thought that by doing so the House would act upon a sound policy, and without interfering with any man's religious rights.

**Mr. GIBBON WAKEFIELD** said, with regard to what had fallen from the honourable member for Wairarapa respecting what he (Mr. Wakefield) had stated of America, he could not say as a fact that prayers were read or said in all the Legislative Assemblies throughout the Union, but that he believed such was the case. With respect to the New England States he could speak positively, and he believed he might safely say so also of the others. Laxity in religion had been referred to, but the fact was that in no country was there a greater manifestation of deep religious sentiment and principle than in America. And, to show their great regard for religious equality, he might mention that some years ago a proposal was made, in order to secure a better observance of the Sabbath, that the mails should be stopped on that day. That this met with acceptance among a people remarkable for their strict Sabbath observance was not surprising; and the law was about to be passed, when one said that, to make it complete and equal, the law should extend also to the Jews' Sabbath-that the rule should be absolute on the Saturday as well as on the Sunday; and, lest there should be any appearance of inequality, the measure was abandoned altogether. And yet, in that country, the practice sought to be established here, and opposed on the ground of its being an infringement of religious rights-this practice was, he believed, everywhere observed. He should have been glad to have avoided further discussion on this subject; he did not profess to claim for himself the high religious feeling which he sincerely believed guided the life of his honourable friend the mover of the resolution; but he should be sorry, for the sake of decency, that New Zealand should be singular in this respect among the Christian countries of the earth. That which was sought for here was observed by England and Holland, Protestant countries; by Belgium and Sardinia, Catholic countries; and he might go on to mention many others. He did not therefore wish that New Zealand should be the exception to what was considered everywhere decent and good to be observed.

**Dr. LEE** was at a loss to know how it would be possible for his honourable colleague for the Northern Division to frame forms of religious ceremony in which the Jew and the Christian could unite. He thought, as the Constitution had very properly rid them of State religion, the House should take care how they voluntarily submitted to it.

Several other members briefly addressed the House.

The House divided on the question, "That Mr. Weld's amendment be agreed to."

AYES, 10: Crompton, FitzGerald, Gledhill, King, Lee, Ludlam, O'Neill, Revans, Stuart-Wortley, Teller: Weld.

NOES, 20: Bartley, Cargill, Carleton, Cutten, Forsaith, Gray, Greenwood, Hart, Kelham, Macandrew, Mackay, Merriman, Monro, O'Brien, Picard, Rhodes, Sewell, Taylor, Wakefield E.G., Wakefield E.J.

Majority against, 10.

The amendment was consequently negatived.

Whereupon the original motion was put and carried.

**Mr. FORSAITH** moved, and **Mr. CUTTEN** seconded, That, in proceeding to carry out the resolution of the House to open its proceedings with prayer, the House distinctly asserts the privilege of a perfect political equality in all religious denominations, and that, whoever may be called upon to perform this duty for the House, it is not thereby intended to confer or admit any pre-eminence to that Church or religious body to which he may belong.

**Mr. FITZGERALD** moved, as an amendment, That this House adjourn until to-morrow at two o'clock.

**Mr. O'NEILL** seconded the amendment.

Amendment put, and negatived.

The original motion was then put, and carried.

**The Rev. F. J. LLOYD**, being in attendance, was introduced, and read prayers.

**Mr. SPEAKER** having thanked the Rev. F. J. Lloyd, in the name of the House, for his attendance, that gentleman withdrew.