# CLERK OF HOUSE.

Mr. REVANS moved, That Mr. Coates be appointed the Clerk of the House of Representatives. He thought the House would see the necessity of appointing some one to this office immediately, and he was sure no man could be found in the country so well qualified for it as Mr. Coates.

The Hon. J. STUART-WORTLEY seconded the motion.

Mr. SEWELL thought notice had better be given, and the subject brought before the House in a formal way.

Major GREENWOOD thought there was a question as to where the right of appointment was held-whether by the Officer Administering the Government, or by that House. He was sure in either case Mr. Coates would be appointed; for who was better fitted for the office? But the question of right of appointment ought to be decided.

Mr. CARLETON objected to the right being claimed by the House, as it belonged, most certainly, to the Governor, on the same principle which guided similar appointments in the House of Commons. The Clerk there was appointed by the Crown, and his Commission given as "Clerk of the Parliament to wait on the Commons." The House would do well to keep within the four corners of the Constitution, which gave them power to appoint their Speaker, but there stopped. In conversation, a member had said to him, "Let us get all we can;" but he (Mr. Carleton) would say, Let us get all we are entitled to.

Mr. O'NEILL said he was not ashamed to admit that it was he who had used the language quoted by the honourable member. He was most anxious, and while he breathed he would strive to get all the power he could into the hands of the people's representatives, for without power their meeting there was to no purpose. He thought the Governor had nothing whatever to do with the appointment of the servants of that House: the House had as clear a right to appoint their Clerk as their Speaker.

Mr. FORSAITH would not deny that the rules and practices of the House of Commons might be found to be in many cases a good guide for that House, but he thought that the right given by the Constitution to the House to elect its Speaker embodied within itself also the right to appoint the subordinate officers.

Mr. REVANS then gave notice of his motion for Monday.

The House adjourned at five o'clock p.m. until two o'clock p.m. on Saturday.