<!--19-->
# ADDRESS IN REPLY.

Mr. FITZGERALD moved the following Address in reply to the Speech of His Excellency the Officer Administering the Government:—

    "To His Excellency the Officer Administering the Government of the Islands of New Zealand.

    "MAY IT PLEASE YOUR EXCELLENCY,—

    "We, the House of Representatives of New Zealand in Parliament assembled, desire to express to your Excellency our grateful thanks for the Address with which your Excellency has been pleased to inaugurate the opening of the first General Assembly of New Zealand.

    "We cordially unite in the language of congratulation with which your Excellency has been pleased to refer to the prosperity which pervades all parts of this colony; and we desire to add our own testimony, derived from personal acquaintance with the various provinces, to the justice of your Excellency's expressions. We entertain the strongest conviction that, under the liberal institutions which have been bestowed on this colony by the English Parliament, that prosperity will be fostered and extended.

    "Entirely appreciating the difficulty of your Excellency's position, and the responsibility of initiating a course of policy during your temporary administration of the Government, we desire to record our deep and lasting sense of the great benefit which your Excellency has conferred on the colony by convening the General Assembly at the earliest possible period after it became your duty to assume the government of New Zealand.

    "We feel that it would be premature at so early a period of the session to enter upon all the various subjects to which your Excellency has been pleased to direct our attention; but we desire to express our earnest wish to co-operate in the most cordial manner with your Excellency in carrying into effect whatever policy may ultimately be determined on as most beneficial to the colony at large, and to the several provinces of which it is composed; and to assure your Excellency that whatever measures may be submitted to the House by your Excellency's Government shall receive their most respectful and patient consideration."

Having read the Address, Mr. FitzGerald proceeded, Mr. Speaker, I need scarcely say that it is with extreme diffidence I have acceded to a request made to me by many members of this House that I would undertake the office of moving, in reply to His Excellency's Speech at the opening of the session, the Address which I have read. Had those relations been in existence between the Executive and this House which ordinarily subsist in Constitutional Governments based on the system of representation, it would, as you are aware, have been the duty of His Excellency's Advisers to have proposed the terms in which the House should reply to His Excellency, and to have provided for the Address being submitted to our consideration. In the absence, however, of such a machinery, it seemed right to several members that an Address should be prepared in language suited to the circumstances in which we are placed, and that the gracious and honourable task of proposing that Address should be intrusted to myself, as being the only member of your House present, occupying the position of Superintendent in one of the provinces of this colony. I trust, then, Sir, the House will acquit me of anything like presumption in intruding myself upon their notice, or of any undue desire to place myself in a position which would have been far more worthily filled by many of those whom I see around me; and I trust they will accord me their utmost indulgence in the execution of a task of no ordinary difficulty. But it is not merely the difficulty of the task which induces me to rely upon that indulgence; it is not merely the wide range of matter, the multiplicity of the subjects, and the importance of the interests which are involved in a consideration of His Excellency's Speech; it is not merely the novelty of the position in which I am placed: it is the deep anxiety I feel lest any expression should fall from my lips which may inadvertently tend to destroy that entire and cordial unanimity of feeling with which it is so desirable we should respond to Her Majesty's Representative, upon the occasion of opening the first Parliament of New Zealand. It is not an unimportant matter, Sir, the language which it shall befit the House to use upon such an occasion. It is true we are not about to enact a law, to adopt a measure, which shall immediately affect the well-being of our countrymen; it is true we are about to fulfil a duty rather of ceremony than of practical utility—simply to agree upon a form of words: but I pray the House not to deem the utterance of words of ceremony a matter beneath their most patient attention. Expressions, however brief, of compliment and congratulation, sometimes become matters of State importance, and the present occasion is one upon which the words we shall use are peculiarly impressed with that character, as being an indication of the general tone and feeling which the House is about to adopt in communicating with His Excellency. It may be, Sir, that the language which we shall now use will, in some measure, determine whether this House is destined to fritter away its energies during the present session in fruitless recrimination, or perchance in dangerous collision with the Executive, or whether a friendly and cordial spirit of mutual co-operation shall at once be established, which may be attended by the happiest result to the people with whose interests we are charged. It is not, I hope, presumptuous in me to remind the House that there never was an Assembly whose proceedings were watched with more anxious attention or more ardent hope than those in which we are about to engage. You well know for how long a period this colony has been suffering under the effects of a struggle between political parties, or rather, I might almost say, between the people and the Govern<!--20-->ment. You well know how disappointed hope has vented itself in indignant complaints, remonstrances, petitions, and addresses; you know, too, how all have tended to one end, all have looked to one remedy—the establishment of the political institutions of England. Sir, the wishes and the hopes of ten long and anxious years in the history of New Zealand are consummated in the scene which I see around me. Partially, indeed, I know the remedy has been applied by the local Councils in the provinces; but who that has taken a share in the working of these bodies has not felt that their action has been impeded and their utility crippled for the want of that unfettered and unlimited legislative power which resides in the General Parliament? But it is not only in the colony that our actions are regarded with interest. I will not indulge in the bombastic idea that the eyes of England are upon us: but this, Sir, I will venture to assert that many, very many, of our friends in the far-off land of our birth; many, too, of those who have sacrificed time and labour and wealth in the effort to plant in these magnificent islands a colony worthy of England; above all, many of the noblest and most intellectual of the statesmen of England, through whose political influence we are this day enabled to try this great experiment in the government of a dependency—many of these, I am well persuaded, even now, amidst the impending convulsion of Europe, are watching the result of that experiment with the deepest and most anxious interest. I am persuaded that never did a mother listen to the first and feeble articulations of the child of her love with more tender interest or more anxious hope than some of those men will catch the first accents of constitutional liberty which shall fall from the lips of the infant Parliament of New Zealand. For in the prattling of the child they will fondly strive to catch some promise of the greatness of the man. They will judge from our language, from its simplicity, its moderation, its dignity, whether we are fit for the noble institutions which they have given us; they will do justice to the wisdom of a temporary administrator of the Government in calling us to the exercise of our rights and privileges, and they will, perhaps, form a truer estimate of the value of that policy which for so long a time debarred us from their enjoyment. Sir, I have endeavoured to express the feelings by which I conceive the framers of this Address have been actuated. In calling attention to its language, I would first ask the House whether it would not be wise that, suppressing for the time all differences of opinion, even in the most important matters, our first act should be one of unanimity and congratulation that, however we may differ in future times, as differ we shall; however hereafter this House may be divided by the struggles of party and the animosity of faction, as divided it certainly will be—for, as it has been justly remarked, party is the price we pay for freedom—our first act should be one expressive of our common loyalty to the country of our birth and to the Crown of Her Majesty, and of an earnest and patriotic desire to support Her Majesty's Representative in all his efforts for the good government of the country, so far as we shall believe them to be calculated to that end. Indeed, in framing an Address there appeared but two courses open to us: either on the one hand to follow His Excellency through all the topics to which he was pleased to advert, or to confine ourselves to some such language as that under consideration. The former course would have been objectionable, as involving a desultory discussion, without apparent end or practical result, upon almost every possible question of political interest to the colony. It would have precipitated the whole work of the session. If, however, it would have been impossible to introduce so many topics into the Address with any hope of agreement, so it would have been unwise to allude to any of them, for we should be equally unable to agree as to the order of their relative importance, consequently as to which should be noticed and which neglected. I feel convinced, therefore, that the sense of the House will go with me in the proposal that, in presenting an Address to His Excellency, the House shall confine itself to expressions in which we can all agree, and should leave those important matters referred to in the Speech to be dealt with hereafter by substantive resolutions, by special addresses, or by the introduction of Bills, as may in each case be thought desirable. Let me now advert briefly to the language of the Address. After the usual opening of thanks for His Excellency's Speech, and adverting to the general prosperity of the colony, it refers to the circumstances under which the General Assembly has been convened. His Excellency has described his position in simple and manly terms. He says,—

"Holding office but temporarily, feeling myself bound not to embark in any measure which may embarrass the policy or affect the duties of the permanent Governor of the country, and believing that statesmanlike qualities of a high order are needful for conducting to a successful issue the experiment in constituțional government about to be attempted in New Zealand, I might well have shrunk from the responsibility of calling together the first and most momentous meeting of the General Assembly. But, possessing the necessary legal authority, and seeing that Her Majesty's subjects in New Zealand have a right to the exercise of the powers conferred upon them by the British Parliament, I felt that I ought not to allow considerations personal to myself to disappoint their expectations and to delay them indefinitely in the enjoyment of their constitutional privileges."

Sir, His Excellency, in my opinion, understated the force of the reasons which he might justly have urged to excuse himself from the responsibility he has incurred. It might well have occurred to him that difficulty and embarrassment to the Government were not unlikely to arise from the calling of a popular Assembly into action. It could not be unknown to him<!--21--> that a long conflict had been going on between the colonists and the Government. He might well have feared that the minds of the people had been embittered in the struggle, and that the House of Representatives would only afford a field for the utterance of complaint and attack upon the Government, and of fierce demands for the redress of old grievances. A timid and wavering policy would have suggested many such reasons for throwing on his successor the difficulties of meeting a first Parliament. Sir, I hope this House will not deem the language of the Address to be couched in a spirit of exaggerated adulation, but will acknowledge the courage and candour displayed by His Excellency in dismissing such unworthy fears from his mind, and in doing justice to the character of the people under his government; and that they will unanimously agree to respond to His Excellency in the same spirit, and to assure him that he was not deceived in "trusting that, under the circumstances under which the government of this country has devolved upon him, he might rely upon our friendly co-operation and cordial support." But, Sir, I should be allowing a very wrong interpretation to be placed on the meaning and intent of the Address if I were not to guard against its being supposed to convey any approval of the policy which His Excellency has been pleased to propose. I myself, for instance, differ widely from many of the proposals referred to by His Excellency. But all that it is sufficient for our present purpose to show is that the Speech contains nothing to prevent our cordial response in dealing with the measures proposed in the Address. One main point in the Speech consists of the policy to be pursued in regard to the mutual action of the General and Provincial Legislatures. Sir, I venture to say there is no one in this House who can object to the general line of argument adopted by His Excellency. No one can doubt that it is necessary that some distinct rules should be laid down as to the respective jurisdiction and functions of the two legislative bodies. It is possible that many may conceive a course of policy to have been indicated whereby too large powers would be conferred on the General and too little on the Provincial Governments. That is a question which will have to be discussed hereafter; but all will agree with His Excellency that the question is one demanding legislation; and none, I should imagine, will refuse to promise His Excellency their friendly cooperation and support in endeavouring to procure its practical and useful solution. The next question to which I would advert is that of the disposal of the waste lands of the Crown. I am convinced that the policy enunciated by His Excellency as ultimately desirable—that, namely, of handing over their administration to the several provinces—is one which will meet the almost unanimous approval of the House. How that can be effected, or under what conditions, is a matter for subsequent discussion; but I cannot avoid expressing my regret that His Excellency should have been advised that the only mode of carrying his views into operation would be by means of a Bill reserved for the sanction of the Home Government. I am satisfied that His Excel- lency has been wrongly advised that any such legal necessity for delay exists. And I accept the general indication of the policy to be pursued as an assurance that, if, upon deliberation, it should be found that no such legal necessity for delay exists, the wishes expressed by His Excellency will be carried into immediate action. Regarding the matter of the debt to the New Zealand Company it is not necessary I should remark further than that it is one upon which there is a very general agreement of public opinion in the colony; and it is very satisfactory to learn that the views of the Executive Government are in harmony with those of the great mass of the colonists. With regard to that part of His Excellency's Speech referring to the question of revenues and of their legal appropriation, it is satisfactory to find that the General Government have at last taken the same view of the question as that which was taken by several of the Provincial Governments, and that it is contemplated to introduce a Bill for removing those legal difficulties which placed such obstacles in the way of the Provincial Councils appropriating revenue without a violation of consistency and without infringing on the provisions of the Constitution Act. But objections may be urged against His Excellency's Speech not only for what it does, but for what it does not, contain. I will therefore turn for one moment to its omissions. And in the first place I will remark that His Excellency does not seem to me to have been well advised in matters relating to finance. I cannot but call your attention to a great constitutional question involved in this point. This portion of His Excellency's Speech was, as you will remember, delivered to the members of the two Houses intermixed. I regret that course, and I hope it will not be brought into a precedent for the future. It is the right of the Commons to meet in their own House, and to be summoned specially to attend upon the Crown at such place as it shall think fit in delivering a Speech to the Houses of Parliament. I would not have noticed this, as a mere matter of parliamentary etiquette, were it not that the indistinctness of views entertained by His Excellency's Advisers on matters of etiquette appears to have extended itself to matters of a more important nature. His Excellency has apparently been advised to address the nominated Chamber together with the representatives of the people in matters of finance; whereas the right of the representatives of the people to the exclusive privilege of originating money Bills is based on the constitutional maxim that the people can only be taxed by their own consent, signified by their representatives. I regret, therefore, that His Excellency's Advisers should have departed from the ancient usage by which the Crown addresses the Commons separately and solely upon the raising and expenditure of the public revenues. Again, I regret that I cannot gathe<!--22--> from the Speech that it is contemplated by the Government to lay before the House any accounts of the expenditure of the public revenue since the 1st September, 1853, and for which expenditure, wholly without the sanction of law, I imagine a Bill of indemnity will be necessary in order to shield the public accountants from the consequences of illegal expenditure of the public moneys. And, again, I regret that I cannot find in the Speech anything like that distinct assurance which Her Majesty invariably vouchsafes to the Commons that careful estimates of the expenditure for the current year shall be laid before them, and that they will be asked to provide for the exigencies of the public service. But still I do not regard these omissions as constituting any reason why this House should not at starting co-operate most cordially with His Excellency. They arise, in fact, simply because His Excellency's Advisers do not understand the real meaning of constitutional government, because they are endeavouring to apply the forms and usages of a Government consisting solely of an irresponsible Executive, such as that which has hitherto existed in this country, to an entirely different state of things to a constitutional Government such as that we now enjoy. And yet there is nothing more certain than this: that to introduce representative government and not to recognize all those consequences which constitutionally flow from it is to create a system necessarily and unavoidably discordant, and certain to produce collision. There is one other omission in the Speech to which I cannot but allude: I mean all allusion to the great question of Responsible Government. I will not precipitate a discussion which is about so soon to be raised on this question. I have only mentioned it for the purpose of remarking that His Excellency appears to me to have exercised a very wise discretion in omitting to mention that subject in the Speech. The introduction of the principle of Ministerial responsibility is an act which does not, as I conceive it, require the sanction of any new law; it requires a simple act on the part of the supreme Executive power; but that act is not to be hurriedly and arbitrarily performed it should be a spontaneous development of representative institutions. Had His Excellency originated such an act, and had the Chambers not been ripe for its completion, or not been thoroughly satisfied not only of its abstract propriety, but that the time had arrived when it was necessary that the principle should be fully recognized, it is obvious that the Governor would have been placed in a position of great embarrassment. I cannot, therefore, for a moment gather from the silence of the Speech on this head that any objection to the principle is indicated by the Government, or any desire to shrink from the responsibility, should the necessity of the step become apparent, of carrying it into immediate operation. Sir, I have endeavoured to lay before the House sufficient grounds for the adoption of an Address. I have endeavoured to show that, whilst on the one hand the Speech contains much matter which enables the House to reply in terms of cordial congratulation, on the other hand there is nothing in the Address which pledges the House to a policy which they may upon consideration see fit to reject. Sir, it is no part of my duty to foreshadow the policy which it would be right for this House to pursue. Had this question, indeed, been in the hands of the Advisers of the Governor, the omission is one upon which we might reasonably have looked for some general statement; but I cannot sit down without referring for a few moments, as an independent member, to a subject to which I have before partially alluded—I mean the position which this House is to occupy in the machinery of the New Zealand Government. It is already apparent that a tendency exists to the development of two parties in the State—the one leaning towards the centralization of legislative and executive power in the General Government, the other demanding the entire delegation of such power to the local Governments of provinces. However men may be inclined to view this question from the narrower sphere of local politics, in this House, at all events, it becomes us to take a wider range of observation, and to judge not only of immediate but of the future necessities of the whole colony. I confess I used to look upon it as a fault in the Constitution Act that the respective jurisdiction of the General and Provincial Legislatures should not have been distinctly defined, and that concurrent legislation on the same subjects should have been permitted to the two bodies. A maturer consideration of the probable development of the Constitution has induced me to change this view; and I cannot now but think that Parliament rightly judged that the power of the General Assembly should extend and be permanent over all the subordinate local Legislatures of the colony. I am aware that it has been held by the most philosophical and thinking of colonial politicians that, in granting a new Constitution to a colony, the Imperial Parliament should permanently divest itself of its legislative power in local matters, and should transfer such power absolutely to the Legislature of the colony, and that the Home Government should only retain in its hands the power of dealing with such matters within a colony as may affect the integrity and stability of the Empire. And it has been argued that the General Assembly of New Zealand stands in the same relation to the provinces as that in which the Imperial Parliament stands to the several dependencies of the Empire. But this is an analogy which I cannot admit, because I do not understand how the time will ever arrive when it will be desirable for the Imperial Parliament to recall the power it has vested in the colony; whilst in this country the degree of legislative action which it may be wise for the General Legislature to assume over the several parts of the Islands may be varied by time and by circumstances. The immediate and overbearing necessity for the localization of the power of government in the provinces arises from the physical and natural<!--23--> obstacles to facility of communication between them, as well as from the various circumstances attending the foundation of the principal settlements. As, however, these natural barriers are removed by the application of science and the advance of civilization, as population shall increase and the occupation of the provinces be completed to their several limits, as rapidity and frequency of communication shall merge the interests peculiar to each into one common nationality, so it seems to me unavoidable that the power of government, both legislative and executive, will gradually be absorbed by the central authority. How soon these events may come about, it is impossible to predict; but let us remember we live in an age one day of which witnesses transformation and development which years could not effect in olden time. Were it not for this, I should view the future of New Zealand with alarm and solicitude. I should view with alarm the future of six independent States, insignificant in power, developing with their growth as the experience of history teaches us it is not unlikely they will develop—feelings of rivalry and jealousy, if not of actual hostility, one with another. Far be it from me to underrate the unspeakable value of local Governments: I regard them as approximating nearest to the municipal system of England of which the circumstances of this country will admit; and I know well that in local free institutions is the cradle of all the civic virtues which strengthen and ennoble a nation capable of enjoying them, because they are the means not only of actually distributing good government throughout the scattered parts of a country, but of stimulating the patriotism, and calling forth the self-reliance, and kindling the lawful and honourable ambition of a people to devote themselves and their abilities to the service of their country. But I know too, Sir, that, in a nation which is capable of greatness, the strength and energy which are cultivated and matured by free local institutions must be knit together by the firm will and organized and wielded by the powerful arm of a central Executive, lest the body politic should fall to pieces by the very weight of the materials of which it is composed. I believe the time may come—and in these days of wars and rumours of wars no man knows how soon the time may not come—when the very existence of this colony will depend upon the vigour and energy of the General Government. And if it be so essential to maintain those necessary powers in the central Executive, so is it necessary for the preservation of the liberties of the people to maintain with the utmost vigilance the constant and vigorous action of this House. I would then warn those who speak of this House, as I have heard some speak of it, as of minor importance in the institutions of the country—who would carry the theory of Provincialism to an undue length—who would be content to see the sessions of this House taking place at long intervals, if not allowed to fall into disuse—who would cripple the usefulness of this House by opposing the doctrine of the responsibility of the Executive to its will—I would impress upon such men that it is in this House mainly, if not solely, that will some day be found not only the safety of the colony from without, but the surest guarantee for the liberties of the people within. Sir, I trust the House will pardon me for what may seem to be a digression from the special matter before us, but I thought it not wholly irrelevant to that matter, standing as we are upon the threshold of our proceedings, to glance over the possibilities of the future, and, in moving the House to the fulfilment of its first duty, to take a brief survey of its real position. Sir, I fear I have far overtaxed the attention and indulgence of the House. I will therefore conclude by moving the adoption of the Address which has been read.

Dr. MONRO said he rose to second the Address which had been moved by his honourable friend the member for Lyttelton in a speech which the House would agree with him in characterizing as a speech of very great ability. He had hoped that the duty of seconding the adoption of the Address would fall into other and abler hands, and in particular he had hoped to see it done by the much-respected Speaker of the Provincial Council of Auckland; but it seemed that important business unavoidably detained that gentleman elsewhere, and, having been requested yesterday evening by several members of that House to second the Address, he (Dr. Monro) had not thought himself justified in refusing. The first remark he would make was this: that the proceedings here could not be considered analogous to the proceedings upon a similar occasion in the House of Commons, and that they of necessity were anomalous, and not in accordance with the practice of parliamentary government. Where government by party was completely organized, the mover and seconder of the Address were, as a matter of course, understood to entertain similar views upon political questions, and to be connected with the same party. But with regard to him- self and his honourable friend the member for Lyttelton, he did not positively know whether this was the case or not. Public questions had not yet been discussed in the House: no parties were in existence: men's political creeds had not yet been promulgated. He made these remarks in order to guard himself against being supposed to advocate the same line of policy as his honourable friend. He believed, on the other hand, that on several important questions they would be found to differ. But he could agree with him at all events in this: that, waiving all debatable ground, he could unite, with the greatest cordiality and satisfaction, in presenting a loyal and dutiful and thankful Address to His Excellency the Officer Administering the Government, in reply to the Speech they had heard from him the other day, and in acknowledgment of that act of his by which they were for the first time met in the enjoyment of their constitutional privileges. He certainly did feel that they were greatly indebted to His Excellency for the course he<!--24--> had pursued. It was a step which ought to have been taken earlier, and which, for various important reasons which he would not now stop to consider, he would always regret had been deferred so long. On another point he concurred most fully with the honourable member for Lyttelton—that the Address should be couched in very general terms, and should not notice the details of the Specch. There was no analogy between the Governor's Speech and the Speech from the Throne. The former was much more of the nature of a presidential address, and, not indicating merely broad lines of policy, went into considerable detail, and even indicated the exact nature of the Acts which it was desirable to pass. To consider all the questions involved in it would be to anticipate the business of the session. The best answer to the Governor's Speech would be given at the end of the session by their acts and conduct. There was, however, one broad feature of policy embodied in it, on which he would beg to be allowed to say a few words—namely, that part of it in which the paramount advantage of a strong and united central Government was insisted on. This was a question to which he had always attached the greatest importance, and it was in his opinion the principal political problem which would present itself for their solution. It could not be better expressed than in His Excellency's Speech, in which it was said that "it will rest with the General Assembly of these islands whether New Zealand shall become one great nation, exercising a commanding influence in the Southern Seas, or a collection of insignificant, divided, and powerless petty States." With the views expressed in His Excellency's Speech on this subject he begged to express his entire concurrence. His honourable friend the member for Lyttelton had referred to various omissions in the Speech, two of which he would refer to. One was that the House of Representatives should have been exclusively referred to as the party to deal with financial questions and vote the public money. This of course was well known to be the practice in the British Parliament; and, if it were feasible for them to reproduce here all the usages and to copy all the precedents of British constitutional practice, it might perhaps be their duty to see that it was carried out here. But, while he admitted that they could not take a better or a safer guide than the institutions of their fatherland, they must not forget that they were bound to act in accordance with that law which was in fact their charter. Now, he thought that, in making the remarks he had, the honourable member had overlooked the 54th clause of the Constitution Act, in which it is laid down that "It shall not be lawful for the House of Representatives or the Legislative Council to pass, or for the Governor to assent to, any Bill appropriating to the public service any sum of money from or out of Her Majesty's revenue within New Zealand"—which words he took to imply a power on the part of the Legislative Council to deal with money questions.

Mr. SEWELL.—Read on.

Dr. MONRO then read as follows: "unless the Governor, on Her Majesty's behalf, shall first have recommended to the House of Representatives to make provision for the specific public service towards which such money is to be appropriated." He was still in some doubt as to the meaning of the clause, in consequence of the words being "the House of Representatives or the Legislative Council," which would seem to imply that, after the Governor had recommended a provision to be made for any branch of the public service to the House of Representatives, either branch of the Legislature might deal with the question. But he might probably be mistaken in this view of the subject, and, deferring to the opinion of older and more experienced heads in these matters, he would beg to withdraw the remarks he had made on the subject. The other omission alluded to was the subject of Responsible Government. He was not in the least surprised that this had been omitted: he would have been indeed surprised if it had been introduced. In the position occupied by His Excellency it was impossible to suppose that the initiative in a question involving consequences of such importance could be taken by him. He doubted, indeed, whether even a permanent Governor would have felt himself justified in initiating this constitutional practice. But it followed from the remarks, if they were correct, that the advocates of this important measure, upon which he expressed no opinion just now, inasmuch as they were so shortly to have an opportunity of debating it, were not in the smallest degree warranted in supposing that the head of the Executive was opposed to the recognition of the principle. The duty of those who urged this measure was clear: their proper course was to incite that House to take the initiative on that question, to induce it to agree to a resolution affirming the principle, and then to bring the subject formally under the notice of His Excellency, from whom they had every reason to believe that the subject would receive very careful consideration, with an anxious wish to meet the reasonable expectations of the House. He would now conclude by expressing a hope that harmony and good feeling might prevail in this Chamber. Owing to the irregular manner in which the country had been colonized, jealousies had arisen in different places, and separate and conflicting interests seemed to have arisen. These, however, he thought, were, after all, more imaginary than real, and they would undoubtedly be immensely diminished as the occupation of the country proceeded. But he trusted that such feelings, although it was impossible to ignore them, would not be allowed to have any influence upon their conduct. No occasion could be more fitting than the present to be the starting-post of strength and unity, nor could they ever expect to bury all past differences with greater effect or more gracefully than at this present moment. He would wish to seo them proceed in this manner: Give to the provinces the fullest control over all local and special subjects; but, upon all questions affect<!--25-->ing the country as a whole, preserve the action and the authority of the General Government. By such a course of policy, he conceived, they would best promote the prosperity of New Zealand, best solve the great problem of self-government, and best fulfil the expectations of the British statesmen to whom they were indebted for their charter—the Constitution Act—under which they were then assembled.

Mr. FORSAITH said that, before the sense of the House was taken on the question, he would, with the permission of the House, offer a few brief remarks. He did not think it would be very creditable to this province if its representatives were, as a body, to confine the expression of their sentiments to a silent vote. He conceived that the real question before the House was not the intrinsic merits of the Reply, but whether the Reply should be confined to generalities, or, in other words, to a well-turned and well-deserved compliment, or whether it should be a more particular exposition of the views of the House upon all or many of the important topics evolved in the Speech of His Excellency the Officer Administering the Government. This question had, he believed, been settled already by a majority of the members of this House at a private meeting, and therefore it was not his intention to reopen it. On the whole, there could be no difference of opinion on the Reply as a well-expressed acknowledgment of the Speech. He thought, however, that it would not have been injured had there been, in addition to the acknowledgment of the great benefit which His Excellency, in defiance of all personal considerations, had conferred upon the colony by calling this House together—a course of procedure which was so admirably set forth in the eloquent speech of the honourable member for Lyttelton—appended to the third paragraph, in which this acknowledgment occurred, an assurance that His Excellency might rely upon the honour and generosity of honourable members, who, from these motives, would be very careful, in the exercise of the powers conferred upon them, to abstain from any act that would tend to increase the difficulty of His Excellency's position. He had no hesitation, however, in expressing his concurrence with the Reply as it now stood. But, before he sat down, he could not avoid expressing his surprise that the preparation of this document should have been considered sufficiently important to justify the propriety of honourable members holding a political meeting on the evening of the Sabbath Day. Not that he would make the omission of any intimation to him of the intention of honourable members to hold such a meeting a cause of complaint: on the contrary, he thought that honourable members who themselves felt no scruple about the propriety of such conduct paid him a very high compliment by not acquainting him with their intention, as he most certainly should have felt it his duty not to attend. But, as there was another meeting held on Monday, at which that course of procedure was determined upon, which not only interrupted but subverted the required order of the business of the House, in which all the members had a common interest, but decided upon the terms of the Reply now before the House, and as honourable members could not suppose that he and others who knew nothing of this meeting would have any scruple to attend on that occasion, he thought that honourable members who were present displayed towards himself, and those of his colleagues who were like himself left in ignorance of their proceedings, a want of courtesy which they were not at all prepared to expect.

Mr. HART thought that this was one of the occasions on which those members who might be expected to take part in the discussions of that House during the session should state their views, however briefly. The various topics referred to in His Excellency's Speech having been already touched upon by those honourable gentlemen who had moved and seconded the Reply, he felt that he had little to add; except, perhaps, he might say that he fully concurred in the necessity, pointed out by His Excellency, of confining to the legislation of the General Assembly all matters relating to the transfer of property and to the practice of the Supreme Court. But, with regard to that portion of His Excellency's Speech in which he had referred to the summoning of the General Assembly under the peculiar circumstances of his own connection with the Government, he (Mr. Hart) thought that this very circumstance might fairly be regarded as a favourable one for the colony. For there was no doubt that it would be much easier for the representatives of the colonists to mould the Constitution to that form which would be best adapted to their wishes and circumstances under the government of an officer who bore temporary rule than under a permanent Governor who might have a fixed policy of his own to develop. He cordially concurred with the sentiments expressed in the Reply, and trusted that, so far from any embarrassment arising to His Excellency's successor from the steps he had taken in calling together the General Assembly, on the contrary the new Governor would find on his arrival, as the result of this act of His Excellency, the machinery of government set in working order to his hand.

Motion agreed to.

Mr. FITZGERALD moved, That the Address which has now been adopted be presented to His Excellency by Mr. Speaker together with the mover and seconder of the Address and such other members of this House as may desire to accompany the deputation; and that this House do adjourn until three o'clock this day.

Dr. MONRO seconded the motion.

Motion agreed to.

The House accordingly adjourned.

Mr. SPEAKER took the chair at three o'clock p.m.

Mr. SPEAKER announced that he had received a letter from the Private Secretary of His Excellency the Officer Administering the Government, and that His Excellency had<!--26--> fixed three o'clock for receiving the deputation with the Address.

On the motion of Mr. FITZGERALD, it was resolved, That, after the presentation of the Address, the House do stand further adjourned to eleven o'clock on Friday, the 2nd June.

The House accordingly adjourned.