THE GOVERNOR'S SPEECH.
His EXCELLENCY was then pleased to deliver
the following speech: ----
HONORABLE LEGISLATIVE COUNCILLORS,
GENTLEMEN OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
I am happy to meet you again in Parliament,
and to recur to your assistance and advice.
It has afforded me much satisfaction to have
been able to give effect to the wish expressed by
me at the close of the last session, to visit the
southern portion of the Colony. I have thus had
the pleasure of becoming acquainted with most of
its leading towns and rising settlements, in all of
which I have, as the Queen's representative, met
with the most cordial reception. By the people of
Auckland also, on the occasion of my recent visit
to that part ofthe country, I have been most warmly
and loyally received. It has been a pleasing duty
to me to report to the Secretary of State that in
no part of the Empire has Her Majesty more
loyal subjects than the inhabitants of the districts
through which I have travelled. I could not but
be gratified by the rapid progress which it was
evident the Colony generally had made, while in
the settlements which have sprung into existence
during the last few years in the interior, and on
the West Coast of the Middle Island, I was at
once struck by their extent and importance, and
gratified by the presence, notwithstanding the
circumstances under which they were formed, of
teristic of our race.
that regard for law and order which is the charac
that security for life and property, and respect
I can say with confidence
for the law, exist in as marked a degree in those
recently populated districts as in any part of Her
Majesty's dominions.
peace generally throughout the North Island, in
I congratulate you on the re -establishment of
no part of which do I anticipate in future any
systematic or sustained hostility to the Queen's
authority.
The attitude of some Hau-hau fanatics, who in
October last, threatened the town and settlement
of Napier, was such as to cause a temporary
anxiety, but by the judicious measures adopted by
Lieut. -Colonel Whitmore, and all classes of the
Mr. McLean, and gallantly given effect to by
inhabitants of the district, the offenders were
severely punished, tranquillity was speedily restored
and has not since been disturbed in
that neighbourhood. On the West Coast,
also, the Natives who had for years been hostile
to the Queen's authority, met with a serious
check at Pungarehu, from Lieut. - Colonel Mc-
Donnell and the Colonial Forces under his command,
since which time many of them have
returned to their allegiance, and others have
expressed their intention of doing so. The conduct
of Her Majesty's Colonial Forces, both
European and Native, on these and other occasions,
deserves the highest praise.
During the recess I have made a journey,
partly on foot, through the North Island, and
have traversed Native Districts which it had, for
some time past, been deemed unsafe to enter. I
everywhere found the embers of disaffection dying
out, and I was received by the Maori population,
even in districts recently in rebellion, in such a
manner as to inspire confidence in the futuro
peace of the country.
A necessity having arisen for revising existing
arrangements for the transmission of mails between
the Australasian Colonies and the United Kingdom
by way of Suez, it was deemed expedient 
<!--49-->that the whole question of Ocean Postal Communi-
cation, so far as it affects these Colonics, should
be discussed at a Conference of Representatives
of the several Australasian Governments, I accordingly
accredited Representatives on the part
of this Colony to the Conference. The result of
the deliberations of that body will be laid before
you, and will, I trust meet with your approval.
This result appears satisfactory, not only as
providing for the establishment of an efficient and
comprehensive system of postal communication
with all parts of the world, but also as demonstrating
the great benefits which may be derived
from cordial and united action on this and other
subjects affecting these Colonies as a whole.
The Act for the establishment of Post Office
Savings Banks has been brought into operation
during the past year, and the extent to which it
has already been made use of warrants the belief
that it will prove an important means of fostering
industrious and provident habits among the
population at large.
The complicated and unsatisfactory state of the
accounts between the Imperial and Colonial
Governments rendered imperative a careful examination
of those accounts, with a view to their
early and final settlement. I accordingly commissioned
a member of my Government to
conduct the inquiry on behalf of the Colony, in
conjunction with an officer duly appointed by the
Imperial Government. The correspondence on
this subject, and a report from the Colonial Commissioner,
will shortly be submitted to you.
Papers concerning the administration of the
Otago Gold Fields will be laid before you.

GENTLEMEN OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTA
TIVES, -
Accounts of revenue and expenditure for the
past year and Estimates for the ensuing year will
be laid before you; and I trust that you will be
able to recognize in both that careful regard for
economy upon which, at this juncture, the future
prosperity of the Colony greatly depends.
I recommend to your consideration a measure
for the conversion of Provincial Loans into
Colonial Stock, with a view to placing the securities
of New Zealand on such a footing that they
may be more advantageously dealt with than is
at present possible, and to maintaining and
improving our credit in the money market. A
very general belief in the necessity for some such
measure has long been entertained, and has recently
increased. Such necessity is amply confirmed by
the present position of many of the Provincial
Loans.
A Bill will also be submitted to you for
extending the benefits of the Colonial credit to
enterprises calculated to foster and extend the
important industry of the Gold Fields by offering
a guarantee of interest on capital invested (under
proper restrictions and supervision) in procuring
supplies of water for the operations of gold
mining. The very special character of the taxation
and laws of the Gold Fields justifies and
requires such provision for their interests.
HONORABLE GENTLEMEN AND GENTLEMEN,
This part of Her Majesty's dominions will
probably be shortly visited by His Royal Highness
the Duke of Edinburgh. I have at the
earliest moment apprised you of the probability of
this visit, as I am aware that you, and all Her
Majesty's subjects in New Zealand, will desire to
make the best possible preparations to testify to
His Royal Highness the pride and pleasure with
which they receive a Prince who has made so
favourable an impression in other parts of Her
Majesty's dominions, and to show by their reception
of one of Her Majesty's sons how sincere and
earnest is their attachment to that Sovereign who
has established such lasting claims upon their
gratitude and love.
In accordance with the intimation made to you
when I last released you from your duties, my
Government have earnestly applied themselves to
the preparation of a measure for the establishment
of local self- government generally throughout the
country. This measure will shortly be submitted
to you. The growing demand from all parts of
the country for the establishment of institutions
so congenial to our race, and which have largely
promoted its prosperity and developed its habit of
self- reliance, will secure for this Bill your earnest
and careful consideration, and you will discharge
an important service if you meet this demand in
a just and comprehensive spirit by providing the
means whereby the Public Funds shall be equitably
expended on works of local improvement
under the management and in accordance with
the wishes of those immediately interested in
their construction. Measures of this character
tend to diminish the expense of governing the
country, to increase the efficiency of such government,
to promote settlement by stimulating local
energies, to extend and maintain the rights of the
subject, and to train and encourage all classes of
people in the performance of National duties.
The large mining population on the West Coast
Gold Fields justifies an increased representation,
in Parliament, of their interests: a Bill to that
object will consequently be introduced.
The establishment of Friendly Societies in New
Zealand has been productive of great benefit to
large classes of the community, and their daily
increasing number and importance render it advisable
to improve the existing law. A Bill on
this subject will accordingly be submitted to you.
Several important Bills will also be brought
under your notice, with the object of consolidating
and improving the Statute Law, and of
otherwise providing for the growing requirements
of the country, which looks to Parliament for
such salutary measures as changing circumstances
demand.
The repeated recommendations of the Judges
of the Supreme Court, and the proved necessity
of providing more effectively than at present for
the custody of persons convicted of serious crimes
and sentenced to long periods of imprisonment,
demand attention. It is therefore my intention
to appoint at an early date a Royal Commission
to inquire and report on the best mode of instituting
a General Penal Establishment for the
Colony, or such other means of meeting the
necessity referred to as may suggest itself to them
in the course of their inquiries.
I submit to your wisdom the consideration of
these various important subjects, and I pray that
the blessing of God may attend your deliberations,
and may guide them to the promotion of the
welfare of this country.
His Excellency then withdrew, and the Speaker
and members of the House of Representatives
returned to their own Chamber.