# OPENING OF PARLIAMENT

The House met at twelve o'clock noon.

Mr. CARLETON took the chair.

Wɪʟʟɪᴀᴍ Mᴀʀᴛɪɴ, Esq., Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of New Zealand, a Commissioner appointed by *dedimus potestatem* for administering the oath to members, did administer the oath to members who appeared; which being done, and the members having subscribed the oath, they took their seats in the House.

On the motion of Mr. RHODES, seconded by Mr. CUTTEN, the following resolution was adopted: "That a deputation from this meeting of the members of the House of Representatives do wait on His Excellency the Officer Administering the Government, for the purpose of respectfully representing to His Excellency the hope of the members that it may suit the convenience of His Excellency to postpone, until Friday next, the opening of the General Assembly. The deputation to consist of Messrs. Cutten, Greenwood, Porter, Bartley, Clifford, O'Neill, and the mover."

The deputation, having waited upon His Excellency, stated, on their return, that His Excellency had been pleased to say that, whenever it should be announced to him that the House had elected its Speaker, he would be prepared to open the Assembly and deliver his Address.

Mr. CARLETON then declared the meeting dissolved, and left the chair.

On the motion of Mr. REVANS, seconded by Dr. LEE, Mr. CARLETON resumed the chair.

The CHAIRMAN then read the Proclamation summoning the General Assembly.

Mr. REVANS moved, That the House do now proceed to the election of a Speaker.

Mr. RHODES seconded the motion.

Mr. MACANDREW moved, That the House do adjourn until Friday next at eleven o'clock, then to meet for the election of a Speaker.

Mr. MERRIMAN seconded the amendment.

Mr. O'NEILL urged an immediate election of a Speaker.

Mr. FORSAITH argued that by such a course, after having asked His Excellency to assent to a postponement, the House would stultify itself.

Amendment agreed to.

The House accordingly adjourned.