# Saturday, May 30, 1840.

**Mr. Hunter** proposed the postponement of Mr. Moreing's motion, until the next meeting of the Council.

The Secretary's letter to Mr. R. Tod was amended and passed. The following is a copy:—

                         "Council, May 28, 1840.
Sir,— In reply to your letter, dated 21st May, I am instructed by the President and Council to state, that your appeal ought to have reached the Council in the mode prescribed by the Agreement signed by a large body of Colonists in London, and since rendered binding on all persons inhabiting Port Nicholson, by having been extended and ratified by the Sovereign Chiefs of this district; that the members of Council are not in possession of the knowledge you unhesitatingly assert them to possess; that your conduct does not entitle any unsupported charges you may make to the slightest credit; that your artful efforts to produce a rupture between the native and European population at Thorndon, which might have been productive of the worst consequences, furnish grounds for your being pointed out to the police as a dangerous character, and raise the question in the mind of every person interested in the prosperity of the settlement, whether you are entitled to the fellowship of your countrymen.
                       (By order) SAMUAL REVANS;
                                      Secretary.
Mr. Robert Tod, of Australia."

After discussing the subject of calling on the armed inhabitants,

**Mr. Molesworth** proposed, seconded by Mr. Hort:—"That full powers be given to Colonial Wakefield to effect such arrangements as he may consider requisite for calling out a protective force of the armed inhabitants of Port Nicholson."

The motion was agreed to, and the Council adjourned.

New Zealand Gazette and Wellington Spectator > 6 June 1840 > Page 3
https://paperspast.natlib.govt.nz/newspapers/NZGWS18400606.2.9