# APPOINTMENT OF SPEAKER

The Hon. the SPEAKER (Wɪʟʟɪᴀᴍ Sᴡᴀɪɴsᴏɴ, Esq., Attorney-General) then addressed the Council. He said that many of the members were no doubt already aware that His Excellency the Officer Administering the Government had been pleased to appoint him (Mr. Swainson) to fill the office of first Speaker of the Legislative Council of the General Assembly of New Zealand. But it might be proper that, before proceeding to take the chair, he should read and lay before the Council the Commission authorizing him to assume and exercise the duties of the office. [The Speaker here read the Commission, and then continued:] He believed it was an ancient usage for the Speaker of the greatest legislative Assembly in the world, on the occasion of his appointment to office, humbly to represent his incapacity for so great a trust. Having been appointed to the highest and most honourable office which it was in the power of Her Majesty's representative in New Zealand to bestow, he could assure the Council that he had not ventured to undertake its duties without some diffidence, or without a full sense of his need for their considerate indulgence. But, having been selected to fill that distinguished office, could assure the Council that he would feel and having accepted the appointment, he it not only his duty, but his own pride and pleasure, to discharge its requirements in such a manner as might tend to justify the choice, to uphold the character of that Council, and to promote the interests of the colony at large. In exercising his duties, it might no doubt happen that he should express opinions and give decisions in which the Council might not be able to concur. But he would pray that, however much they might deem him to be in error as to judgment, they would believe him to be at all times influenced by a sincere desire faithfully, impartially, and to the best of his ability to discharge the duties of the office.

The Hon. the SPEAKER then read the Proclamation calling the meeting of the General Assembly.